title : The Bistro Styx

author : Rita Dove

text : 
She was thinner, with a mannered gauntness   
as she paused just inside the double 
glass doors to survey the room, silvery cape   
billowing dramatically behind her. What’s this, 

I thought, lifting a hand until 
she nodded and started across the parquet;   
that’s when I saw she was dressed all in gray,   
from a kittenish cashmere skirt and cowl 

down to the graphite signature of her shoes.   
“Sorry I’m late,” she panted, though   
she wasn’t, sliding into the chair, her cape 

tossed off in a shudder of brushed steel.   
We kissed. Then I leaned back to peruse 
my blighted child, this wary aristocratic mole. 


“How’s business?” I asked, and hazarded   
a motherly smile to keep from crying out:   
Are you content to conduct your life   
as a cliché and, what’s worse, 

an anachronism, the brooding artist’s demimonde?   
Near the rue Princesse they had opened 
a gallery cum souvenir shop which featured 
fuzzy off-color Monets next to his acrylics, no doubt, 

plus bearded African drums and the occasional miniature   
gargoyle from Notre Dame the Great Artist had   
carved at breakfast with a pocket knife. 

“Tourists love us. The Parisians, of course”— 
she blushed—“are amused, though not without   
a certain admiration ...” 
                                     The Chateaubriand 


arrived on a bone-white plate, smug and absolute   
in its fragrant crust, a black plug steaming 
like the heart plucked from the chest of a worthy enemy;   
one touch with her fork sent pink juices streaming. 

“Admiration for what?” Wine, a bloody 
Pinot Noir, brought color to her cheeks. “Why,   
the aplomb with which we’ve managed 
to support our Art”—meaning he’d convinced 

her to pose nude for his appalling canvases,   
faintly futuristic landscapes strewn   
with carwrecks and bodies being chewed 

by rabid cocker spaniels. “I’d like to come by 
the studio,” I ventured, “and see the new stuff.”   
“Yes, if you wish ...” A delicate rebuff 


before the warning: “He dresses all 
in black now. Me, he drapes in blues and carmine— 
and even though I think it’s kinda cute, 
in company I tend toward more muted shades.” 

She paused and had the grace 
to drop her eyes. She did look ravishing,   
spookily insubstantial, a lipstick ghost on tissue,   
or as if one stood on a fifth-floor terrace 

peering through a fringe of rain at Paris’   
dreaming chimney pots, each sooty issue   
wobbling skyward in an ecstatic oracular spiral. 

“And he never thinks of food. I wish 
I didn’t have to plead with him to eat ....” Fruit   
and cheese appeared, arrayed on leaf-green dishes. 


I stuck with café crème. “This Camembert’s 
so ripe,” she joked, “it’s practically grown hair,”   
mucking a golden glob complete with parsley sprig   
onto a heel of bread. Nothing seemed to fill 

her up: She swallowed, sliced into a pear, 
speared each tear-shaped lavaliere 
and popped the dripping mess into her pretty mouth.   
Nowhere the bright tufted fields, weighted 

vines and sun poured down out of the south.   
“But are you happy?” Fearing, I whispered it   
quickly. “What? You know, Mother”— 

she bit into the starry rose of a fig— 
“one really should try the fruit here.” 
I’ve lost her, I thought, and called for the bill.




subjects : Parenthood, Eating & Drinking, Painting & Sculpture, Living, Activities, Arts & Sciences, Mythology & Folklore, Heroes & Patriotism