title : There Came a Soul

author : Rita Dove

text : 
After IVAN ALBRIGHT’s Into the World There Came a Soul Called Ida
She arrived as near to virginal 
as girls got in those days—i.e., young, 
the requisite dewy cheek 
flushed at its own daring. 
He had hoped for a little more edge. 
But she held the newspaper rolled like a scepter,   
his advertisement turned up to prove 
she was there solely at his bidding—and yet 
the gold band, the photographs ... a mother, then. 

He placed her in the old garden chair,   
the same one he went to evenings 
when the first tug on the cord sent the bulb   
swinging like the lamps in the medic’s tent 
over the wounded, swaddled shapes that moaned   
each time the Screaming Meemies let loose,   
their calculated shrieks so far away 
he thought of crickets—while all around him   
matted gauze and ether pricked up 
an itch so bad he could hardly sketch   
each clean curve of tissue opening. 
I shut my eyes, walk straight to it. 
Nothing special but it’s there, wicker   
fraying under my calming fingers. 

What if he changed the newspaper into a letter,   
then ripped it up and tucked the best part 
from view? How much he needed that desecrated   
scrap! And the red comb snarled with a few   
pale hairs for God in his infinite greed 
to snatch upon like a hawk targeting a sparrow— 
he couldn’t say At least I let you keep your hair  
so he kept to his task, applying paint 
like a bandage to the open wound. 

Pretty Ida, out to earn a penny 
for her tiny brood. 
He didn’t mask the full lips 
or the way all the niggling fears 
of an adolescent century 
shone through her hesitant eyes, 
but he painted the room out, blackened   
every casement, every canvas drying   
along the wall, even the ailing coffeepot   
whose dim brew she politely refused,   
until she was seated 
as he had been, dropped 
bleak and thick, 
onto the last chair in the world.




subjects : Money & Economics, Parenthood, Photography & Film, Living, Arts & Sciences, Social Commentaries