title : Interior at Petworth: From Turner

author : Rosanna Warren

text : 
(Lord Egremont speaks)
It was a way of punishing the house, setting it ablaze 
in ruddy, golden flames; smoke 
in billows up the front stairs; walls 
cringing like leaves.   
I say, I am afraid 
in my own house. Do not believe 
I started this, it was 
that man, who was to portray the park alone, mind you, 
but then became 
enamored of the music room. 
And now what have we: floods 
of fire rolling from room to room, furniture wrecked 
in seethe, my wife   
Lady Amelia turned 
wraith, God knows what fish 
and drowning slaves cast up in the tide 
along with pocket Bibles, snuffboxes, antimacassars, the   
familiar bric-a-brac of the well-kept house. 
Where are Edward, Lavinia, Jane? Why 
is no one crying, “Fire! Fire!”? Am I 
alone? 
         The man has no sense of proportion. 
He had himself lashed to the mast, once, it is said, 
on a steamboat off the harbor mouth 
in full blizzard: sailors blinded by snow, the boat 
crippled, led by the lead, they damn near died to a man, and he— 
he was observing “the light at sea,” he said. 
The painting? “Soapsuds and whitewash,”   
the critics described it so. 

But here, in our house, it is catastrophe   
of flame, not weather, he loosed. 
He is a man 
in love with last things, clearly, 
the last things, but 
never understood the first, it seems to me,   
and certainly not the genial medias res 
of decorous, daily life. 
What tea-times we’ve known in these chambers, what sonatinas, 
lieder of an evening, whist, 
Emmeline embroidering, the hounds calm at the hearth, now all 
dissolved. 
               Perhaps there are no flames.   
A bloody haze arises, it could be 
my own eyes that fail. 
I hear nothing, but fear 
the upstairs rooms, cramped rooms 
I have not entered in ages, only remember 
the draughts, creakings, grime in closet corners,   
windows too tight to lean from, the smell   
of antique damp. And now, who knows   
what acts unroll 
on narrow beds, on floorboards warped askew? 
As steam is rising, rising? As heat 
buoys the house up into an atmosphere   
all of its own creation? 
Who are 
the participants? Where has Amelia gone?   
Why, in this furnace, can I hear no sound,   
or feel my own skin begin to peel?




subjects : Painting & Sculpture, Home Life, History & Politics, Seas, Rivers, & Streams, Relationships, Nature, Arts & Sciences, Social Commentaries