title : Chicago’s Congo

author : Frank Marshall Davis

text : 
(Sonata for an Orchestra)
Chicago is an overgrown woman   
      wearing her skyscrapers 
      like a necklace ... 
Chicago’s blood is kaleidoscopic   
Chicago’s heart has a hundred auricles 

*       *       * 

                                  From the Congo   
                                  to Chicago 
                                  is a long trek 
                                  —as the crow flies 

Sing to me of a red warrior moon victorious in a Congo sky ... show me a round dollar moon in the ragged blue purse of Chicago’s heavens ... tell me of a hundred spoil laden blacks tramping home from the raid ... point me out a hundred brown men riding the elevated home on payday ... pick me the winners ... in Chicago? ... in the Congo? 

Skyscraper pinnacles rip great holes in the rubber balloon bag of the sky ... do spears kill quicker than printed words? ... midnight lies and cobra fangs ... ask me if civilization produces new forms of biting and tearing and killing ... see three million whites and two hundred thousand blacks civilized in Chicago 

                                  From the Congo   
                                  to Chicago 
                                  is a long trek 
                                  —as the crow flies 

*       *       * 

I’m a grownup man today Chicago 
My bones are thick and stout 
      (when I moved to new districts bombings   
      couldn’t break them) 
My flesh is smooth and firm 
      (look—the wounds you give me heal quickly)   
See how the muscles ripple under my night-black skin   
My strength comes not from resting 
You should be proud of me Chicago 
I’ve got a lion’s heart and a six-shooter 
I’ve got a fighter’s fist and five newspapers 
I’ve got an eye for beauty and another for cash   
Nothing you’ve got I can’t have 

A song dashes its rhythms in, my face like April rain 
My song is a song of steel and bamboo, of brick flats and reed huts, of steamboats and slim canoes, of murder trials and jackal packs, of con men and pythons 
My tune I get from automobiles and lions roaring, from the rustle of banknotes in a teller’s window and the rustle of leaves in Transvaal trees 
I ask you to find a better song, a louder song, a sweeter song— 
Here’s something Wagner couldn’t do 

State Street is a wide gray band across Chicago’s forehead   
At night a white faced mother moon clothes Skyscrapers in gray silk 
At night when clocks yawn and hours get lazy 
At night when the jungle’s a symphony in grays ... 
Oh mother moon, mother of earth, bringer of silver gifts   
Bring a veil of stardust to wrap this Congo in 
Bring a shawl of moonmist to clothe Chicago’s body 

*       *       * 

Between the covers of books lie the bones of yesterdays   
Today is a new dollar 
And 
My city is money mad 

*       *       * 

Across the street from the Ebenezer Baptist Church,   
      women with cast-iron faces peddle love 
In the flat above William’s Funeral Home 
      six couples sway to the St. Louis Blues 
Two doors away from the South Side Bank 
      three penny-brown men scorch their guts with four bit whiskey 
Dr. Jackson buys a Lincoln 
His neighbor buys second hand, shoes 
      —the artist who paints this town must 
      use a checkered canvas ... 

Tired looking houses of brown stone 
Ramshackle flats with sightless eyes 
A surface car throws a handful of white sparks at cracked red bricks 
An L train roars oaths at backyard clotheslines 
Mornings on South Parkway flats sit like silent cats watching the little green mice of buses running up and down the boulevard 
And only grass has heard the secrets of vacant lots 

*       *       * 

This song has no tune. You cannot hum it. 
This song has no words. You cannot sing it. 
This song everybody knows, nobody knows. 
It is in a pattern of brown faces at the Wabash Y.M.C.A., a 35th Street gambling place, a Parkway theatre—you get it or you don’t 
It is a melody of everything and nothing 

I saw twelve stars sitting along the edge of a four story flat   
I saw a moon held by leafless tree fingers 
I heard a shot tear huge holes in the blanket of silence   
Later—just a little later—the moon got away and the stars stepped back into the sky 

There will always be new wordless songs, new humless tunes   
Chicago sings these songs each day   
Chicago who wears her skyscrapers like a necklace ...




subjects : Race & Ethnicity, Social Commentaries, Cities & Urban Life, History & Politics