title : Otranto

author : Barbara Guest

text : 
At sunset from the top of the stair watching 

the castle mallets wrenched from their socket 

fell from ambush into flame flew into hiding;   

above the stoneware a latch like muscle hid   

the green; he stood waist high under the rapt 

ceiling and hanged the sparrow; where the kitchen   

had been a mirror of eggs served in a tumbler he 

saw the ring when a lancet pierced and threw it. 


In a basket and lowered it where sails enter 

the harbor over a parchment like dominoes; 

the petrel-like eyelash. 

To the sun and its rites were pulled the dried   

banners; they flew past the ruins the tower 

and window where ivory guided the mist on his back; 

he rubbed his eyes and counted them kneeling 

wrinkled as grass. 


A ghost in their nostrils put a heel at their 

forehead; they saw only the moon as it 

fasted. 


II 

If the ship meant anything if he heard a world 

view in the midst of his rhythm or the spell 

lustrous like hair on his arm; that groaned as 

it struck near the tumble down or 

combing hair; words burnt as they quickened. 

The bitter they share crept into forage and 

muster is in their skin; the grey 

worked like a vise they brushed this 

to turn arrows; they shut off the vast 

cellar and the turret leaped to a pattern; 

the mosaic blended was untouched. 


III 

The frankish hills and hummocks metered 

the greed over sun and cloud; voluptuous 

in the straits turbanned held scarves to the 

water each sail embroidered; 

who washed in their music a lattice. 

A major or borrowed sky this aspect provides 

the lily stalk inside the frame; a gesture the lily 

pointing north as if the wrench from sky decides 

cold rain or change of tide; the lily 

she chooses. 


IV 

Waking in must the high pierced window dew on 

the furnaced bar the poaching hour the cup 

takes smoke from the tower; they drink 

in the smoke the print cradled; cut in dark. 

The siege made cloth a transfer 

learned from invaders who craved it; 

spindle thieves. 

She sang high notes and pebbles went into her 

work where it changed into marks; in that room 

the armor-like wrens: 


rites turned with thread a dower 

begs lapis; eglantine on a spoon; the castle 

breeds tallow. 


V 

A change of tide might delay the run 

they watched as if by simple water; 

read magisterially whatever the book decided; 

night outside covered with filmic screen 

ghosts they store; then bring an experimental 

wheel out of hiding. 

Even the Nile wind; fortune cards 

jugglers a remedy from old clothes; 

to appease the fable—pearls 

rolling in straw. 


The way a cowslip bends 

they remember or Troilus as he stared; 

they agree on brighter covers; looser 

shifts fluent tower to tower. 


More ephemeral than roundness or 

the grown pear tree connected 

with vision a rose briar. 


VI 

There was only a rugged footpath 

above the indifferent straits and a shelf where the 

castle lay perhaps it was sphered like Otranto; 

there the traveller stood naked and talked 

aloud or found a lily and thought a sword; 

or dragged a carcass upon blunt stone like a 

corded animal. In weeds in spiritual 

seclusion a felt hand lifted. 





subjects : Activities, Travels & Journeys