title : A Poem Beginning with a Line

author : Pindar

text : 
I  The light foot hears you and the brightness begins god-step at the margins of thought,       quick adulterous tread at the heart.   Who is it that goes there?       Where I see your quick face notes of an old music pace the air,   torso-reverberations of a Grecian lyre.  In Goya’s canvas Cupid and Psyche   have a hurt voluptuous grace bruised by redemption. The copper light   falling upon the brown boy’s slight body is carnal fate that sends the soul wailing   up from blind innocence, ensnared         by dimness into the deprivations of desiring sight.  But the eyes in Goya’s painting are soft, diffuse with rapture absorb the flame. Their bodies yield out of strength.       Waves of visual pleasure wrap them in a sorrow previous to their impatience.  A bronze of yearning, a rose that burns         the tips of their bodies, lips, ends of fingers, nipples. He is not wingd.   His thighs are flesh, are clouds       lit by the sun in its going down, hot luminescence at the loins of the visible.        But they are not in a landscape.         They exist in an obscurity.  The wind spreading the sail serves them. The two jealous sisters eager for her ruin       serve them. That she is ignorant, ignorant of what Love will be,          serves them. The dark serves them. The oil scalding his shoulder serves them, serves their story. Fate, spinning,       knots the threads for Love.  Jealousy, ignorance, the hurt . . . serve them.   II  This is magic. It is passionate dispersion.   What if they grow old? The gods       would not allow it.       Psyche is preserved.  In time we see a tragedy, a loss of beauty         the glittering youth of the god retains—but from this threshold         it is age that is beautiful. It is toward the old poets         we go, to their faltering, their unaltering wrongness that has style,         their variable truth,       the old faces, words shed like tears from a plenitude of powers time stores.  A stroke.   These little strokes.   A chill.         The old man, feeble, does not recoil.   Recall. A phase so minute,       only a part of the word in- jerrd.        The Thundermakers descend,  damerging a nuv. A nerb.       The present dented of the U nighted stayd. States. The heavy clod?         Cloud. Invades the brain. What         if lilacs last in this dooryard bloomd?  Hoover, Roosevelt, Truman, Eisenhower— where among these did the power reside that moves the heart? What flower of the nation   bride-sweet broke to the whole rapture?   Hoover, Coolidge, Harding, Wilson hear the factories of human misery turning out commodities.   For whom are the holy matins of the heart ringing? Noble men in the quiet of morning hear   Indians singing the continent’s violent requiem.   Harding, Wilson, Taft, Roosevelt,   idiots fumbling at the bride’s door, hear the cries of men in meaningless debt and war. Where among these did the spirit reside   that restores the land to productive order?   McKinley, Cleveland, Harrison, Arthur, Garfield, Hayes, Grant, Johnson, dwell in the roots of the heart’s rancor. How sad “amid lanes and through old woods”      echoes Whitman’s love for Lincoln!  There is no continuity then. Only a few       posts of the good remain. I too that am a nation sustain the damage       where smokes of continual ravage obscure the flame.                               It is across great scars of wrong         I reach toward the song of kindred men         and strike again the naked string old Whitman sang from. Glorious mistake!         that cried:        “The theme is creative and has vista.”         “He is the president of regulation.”        I see always the under side turning,   fumes that injure the tender landscape.         From which up break lilac blossoms of courage in daily act         striving to meet a natural measure.   III      (for Charles Olson)                                                Psyche’s tasks—the sorting of seeds   wheat      barley      oats      poppy      coriander anise      beans      lentils      peas      —every grain                                   in its right place                                                                before nightfall;  gathering the gold wool from the cannibal sheep   (for the soul must weep        and come near upon death);  harrowing Hell for a casket Proserpina keeps                                                             that must not       be opend . . . containing beauty?   no!      Melancholy coild like a serpent                                                           that is deadly sleep       we are not permitted                                      to succumb to.        These are the old tasks.         You’ve heard them before.        They must be impossible. Psyche must despair, be brought to her                                                 insect instructor;   must obey the counsels of the green reed; saved from suicide by a tower speaking,       must follow to the letter       freakish instructions.  In the story the ants help. The old man at Pisa         mixd in whose mind (to draw the sorts) are all seeds             as a lone ant from a broken ant-hill  had part restored by an insect, was       upheld by a lizard                        (to draw the sorts) the wind is part of the process                       defines a nation of the wind—        father of many notions,                                         Who? let the light into the dark? began   the many movements of the passion?                                                        West from east   men push.                               The islands are blessd   (cursed)   that swim below the sun,     man upon whom the sun has gone down!  There is the hero who struggles east   widdershins to free the dawn   and must                                              woo Night’s daughter, sorcery, black passionate rage, covetous queens,   so that the fleecy sun go   back from Troy,       Colchis, India . . . all the blazing armies spent, he must struggle alone toward the pyres of Day.                                               The light that is Love   rushes on toward passion. It verges upon dark.         Roses and blood flood the clouds.       Solitary first riders advance into legend.     This land, where I stand, was all legend   in my grandfathers’ time: cattle raiders,      animal tribes, priests, gold. It was the West. Its vistas painters saw    in diffuse light, in melancholy, in abysses left by glaciers as if they had been the sun    primordial carving empty enormities                                  out of the rock.                                   Snakes lurkd guarding secrets.         Those first ones                                    survived solitude.        Scientia holding the lamp, driven by doubt;   Eros naked in foreknowledge   smiling in his sleep;    and the light   spilld, burning his shoulder—the outrage       that conquers legend— passion, dismay, longing, search         flooding up where the Beloved is lost. Psyche travels   life after life, my life, station       after station, to be tried        without break, without news, knowing only—but what did she know?         The oracle at Miletus had spoken truth surely: that he was Serpent-Desire         that flies thru the air, a monster-husband. But she saw him fair  whom Apollo’s mouthpiece said spread         pain beyond cure    to those       wounded by his arrows.  Rilke torn by a rose thorn blackend toward Eros.          Cupidinous Death!         that will not take no for an answer.   IV               Oh yes!      Bless the footfall where step by step      the boundary walker (in Maverick Road      the snow thud by thud      from the roof   circling the house—another tread)     that foot      informd by the weight of all things       that can be elusive no more than a nearness to the mind         of a single image              Oh yes!      this most dear       the catalyst force that renders clear the days of a life from the surrounding medium!              Yes, beautiful rare wilderness! wildness that verifies strength of my tame mind,         clearing held against indians, health that prepared to meet death,       the stubborn hymns going up into the ramifications of the hostile air        that, decaptive, gives way. Who is there?   O, light the light!       The Indians give way, the clearing falls.   Great Death gives way   and unprepares us.       Lust gives way.    The Moon gives way.   Night gives way.   Minutely,   the Day gains.  She saw the body of her beloved       dismemberd in waking . . . or was it in sight? Finders Keepers we sang       when we were children      or were taught to sing before our histories began      and we began       who were beloved      our animal life toward the Beloved,      sworn to be Keepers.        On the hill before the wind came   the grass moved toward the one sea,         blade after blade dancing in waves.  There the children turn the ring to the left.   There the children turn the ring to the right.         Dancing . . . Dancing . . .  And the lonely psyche goes up thru the boy to the king         that in the caves of history dreams. Round and round the children turn.       London Bridge that is a kingdom falls.  We have come so far that all the old stories whisper once more. Mount Segur, Mount Victoire, Mount Tamalpais . . .         rise to adore the mystery of Love!  (An ode? Pindar’s art, the editors tell us, was not a statue but a mosaic, an accumulation of metaphor. But if he was archaic, not classic, a survival of obsolete mode, there may have been old voices in the survival that directed the heart. So, a line from a hymn came in a novel I was reading to help me. Psyche, poised to leap—and Pindar too, the editors write, goes too far, topples over—listend to a tower that said, Listen to Me! The oracle had said, Despair! The Gods themselves abhor his power. And then the virgin flower of the dark falls back flesh of our flesh from which everywhere . . .        the information flows          that is yearning. A line of Pindar         moves from the area of my lamp            toward morning.        In the dawn that is nowhere          I have seen the willful children        clockwise and counter-clockwise turning.
				



subjects : Religion, History & Politics, Love, Theater & Dance, Youth, Poetry & Poets, Painting & Sculpture, Living, Relationships, Arts & Sciences, Social Commentaries, Desire, Infatuation & Crushes, Heartache & Loss, Realistic & Complicated