title : Cool Pastoral on Bloor Street

author : John Reibetanz

text : 
1. 

   Consider the tragic fortitude 
of mannikins, the courage it takes 
   under casual poses to do 
nothing interminably each day. 

   To face unflinching (through sunlit glass 
that bars them from it) the rushing surf 
   of life within reach where they must stand 
marooned on their islands’ plastic turf, 

   and not to cry out: more heroic 
than those Romans the lava rain stunned 
   to statues—misshaped by the panic 
that twisted their limbs, glazed with their pain 

   in black rock—friezes of agony. 
You would never know, from the relaxed 
   swivel of this woman’s wrist as she 
completes a backhand with her racket, 

   that she will never take another 
swing, or from her smile that she has stood 
   balanced here on one foot all summer 
like one of Dante’s damned, and not cracked. 


2. 

   ‘Cracked’ is my father’s word for ‘crazy,’ 
as in ‘You’d have to be cracked to pay 
   that much for a pair of shoes.’ He’s not 
crazy, but he forgets, and today 

   as we pay out his visit’s hours 
strolling on Bloor, he thinks up the same 
   questions again minutes after he’s 
nodded and smiled at answers to them. 

   Looking for things to look at and not 
think, I focus on another grove 
   of mummers: headless, their necks poke out 
like worms from the smartly turned-over 

   collars of turtlenecks and jackets. 
You can tell they’ve also lost their arms 
   from the way the sleeves plummet slackly 
off their shoulders—although they, ashamed 

   to show the mutilation, act cool 
and tuck the cuffs into their pockets. 
   I look at my father—hands trembling, 
head crazed like china with minute cracks 

   through which years exit invisibly— 
and must remind myself his show is 
   kinder, the long-running comedy 
where he’s played every part, from fresh-faced 

   mooning lover to child-duped parent 
to doddering senex: still free now 
   (while heart and limbs play their duet) 
to do a walk-on, ad lib, bow out. 

   He sweats a little in the sunshine. 
Summer stock, lacking the tragic poise 
   that freezes these actors in their scene, 
we move on towards a shadier place.




subjects : Family & Ancestors, Cities & Urban Life, Social Commentaries, Landscapes & Pastorals, Nature, Relationships