title : Pulp Fiction

author : David Baker

text : 
You want more? You want some more of this shit? 
so he puts his weight to his elbow jammed   
under the jaw of the other one pinned 
there, panicked, panting, his back to the bricks.   
The others are loud and jeering and stand   
in a jackal circle a spitting-length 
away. The cold air is full of bird song. 

The sex—sheer sugar—of the flowering trees   
turns to powder against the skin, and cakes   
the sidewalks pale green, and packs the curbs.   
Far away a powerful siren cries. 
Someone is about to get his ass kicked. 
But now the cruel gang spots someone—okay,   
it’s me—who is writing this whole scene down. 

It’s so easy to surpass the limits 
of the powers of description. What are   
you looking at? There are yellow flowers   
sprouting from the downspout above their heads.   
The powers of discursion are no less   
feeble, frail as the least petal. Stop it! 
They don’t stop it. The one in trouble is 

starting to weep, and the others to laugh,   
as the one with the elbow suddenly 
slips a white-handled knife from his pocket.   
(Is this the big city? Are there dime bags   
dropping from the claws of carrion birds?   
Have his bad colors taunted the wrong turf?)   
No. No. No. This is just my little town, 

and the hostile gang is as easily 
eight-years-old as twenty, out of grade school   
since three o’clock. I’m sorry for my mind,   
but the spring has spread a violent seed   
and it has taken root in this poem, 
as in my heart, in the children beating 
each other to a pulp in your city 

as well as mine. Is it less barbarous 
to turn now toward the beautiful? Once 
there was a hillside of white, wild lilies. 
The mayapples were spilling there. A first 
green froth of spring ferns spread under the pines— 
so the pastoral, unperturbed lilies 
stand around our absence in the sunlight. 

What have we done to deserve the pollen,   
the plant persistence of our natures? You 
want more? The boys beat the daylights out of   
the poor boy and I do nothing to help. 
And the flowers are fiction—descriptive,   
discursive—designed to suggest my mind   
in peace or shame. So are the boys, if 

the truth be told. So are the sexual trees. 
The knife, you understand, is real. The knife is mine.




subjects : Nature, Spring, Arts & Sciences, Crime & Punishment, Social Commentaries, Poetry & Poets