title : Poem for Christian, My Student

author : Gail Mazur

text : 
He reminds me of someone I used to know,   
but who? Before class, 
he comes to my office to shmooze, 
a thousand thousand pointless interesting   
speculations. Irrepressible boy, 
his assignments are rarely completed,   
or actually started. This week, instead 
of research in the stacks, he’s performing 
with a reggae band that didn’t exist last week.   
Kids danced to his music 
and stripped, he tells me gleefully, 
high spirit of the street festival. 
He’s the singer, of course— 
why ask if he studied an instrument?   
On the brink of graduating with 
an engineering degree (not, it turned out,   
his forte), he switched to English, 
his second language. It’s hard to swallow   
the bravura of his academic escapes 
or tell if the dark eyes laugh with his face.   
Once, he brought me a tiny persimmon   
he’d picked on campus; once, a poem   
about an elderly friend in New Delhi   
who left him volumes of Tagore 
and memories of avuncular conversation.   
My encouragement makes him skittish— 
it doesn’t suit his jubilant histrionics   
of despair. And I remember myself   
shrinking from enthusiasm or praise,   
the prospect of effort-drudgery.   
Success—a threat. A future, we figure,   
of revision—yet what can the future be 
but revision and repair? Now, on the brink   
again, graduation’s postponed, the brilliant   
thesis on Walker Percy unwritten.   
“I’ll drive to New Orleans and soak   
it up and write my paper in a weekend,”   
he announces in the Honors office.   
And, “I want to be a bum in daytime   
and a reggae star at night!” 
What could I give him from my life   
or art that matters, how share 
the desperate slumber of my early years,   
the flashes of inspiration and passion   
in a life on hold? If I didn’t fool   
myself or anyone, no one could touch   
me, or tell me much . . . This gloomy   
Houston Monday, he appears at my door,   
so sunny I wouldn’t dare to wake him   
now, or say it matters if he wakes at all.   
“Write a poem about me!” he commands,   
and so I do.




subjects : Midlife, Living, Disappointment & Failure, School & Learning, Coming of Age, Poetry & Poets