title : East with Ibn Battuta

author : Thomas James Merton

text : 
1. Cairo 1326  Cloisters (khanqahs) of Darvishes   Built by aristocrats Have silver rings on their doors   The mystics sit down to eat Each from his private bowl Each drinks From his own cup They are given Changes of clothing And a monthly allowance On Thursday nights They are given sugar Soap and oil For their lamps And the price of a bath.  In the great cemetery   They build chambers   Pavilions Hire singers To chant the Koran Day and night among the tombs With pleasant voices.  Convent at Dayr at-Tin: A piece of the Prophet’s Wooden basin with the pencil   With which he applied kohl The awl With which he sewed his sandals   Bought by the founder For a hundred thousand dirhams.   2. Syria  Ma’arra and Sarmín: towns   Of abominable Shi’ites Who hate the Ten Companions   And every person called Omar  In Sarmín (where scented soap   Is made and exported   To Damascus and Cairo)   These heretics so hate the Ten   They will not even say “Ten” Their brokers at auctions   When they come to “ten” Say “Nine-plus-one”  One day a faithful Turk At one of their markets Heard the broker call “Nine-plus-one” He went for him with a club, shouting   “You bastard, say TEN!”  “Ten with a club” Wept the broker.   3. The Nusayris  These heretics hate all true believers and when ordered by          the Sultan To build mosques build them far from their homes   Keep asses and cattle in them let them fall into disrepair.  If a true believer coming from another country Stops in a ruined mosque and sings the call to prayer   The infidels say: “Stop braying, We will bring you a little hay.”  Once a stranger came to the Nusayris and told them he was          the Mahdi He promised to divide Syria among them   Giving each one a city or a town. He gave them olive leaves and said: “These will bring you success. These leaves   Are warrants of your appointment.”  They went forth into city and town And when arrested, each said to the Governor:   “The Imám al-Mahdi has come. He has given me          this town!”  The Governor would then reply: “Show me your warrant”  Each one then produced his olive leaves And was flogged.  So the stranger told the heretics to fight: “Go with myrtle rods,” he said   “Instead of swords. The rods Will turn to swords at the moment of battle.”  They entered a town on Friday when the men were        at the mosque. They raped the women and the Muslims Came running out with swords   And cut them to pieces.  News was sent to the capital by carrier pigeon.          The Governor Moved out with an army. Twenty thousand heretics   Were slaughtered. The rest hid in the mountains.   They offered one dinar per head if they were spared.   This news went by pigeon to the Sultan Who said: “Kill them.”  But the General Said these people could be useful   Working on the land And their lives were spared.   4. Mecca  “The Meccans are very elegant and clean in their dress, and most of them wear white garments, which you always see fresh and snowy. They use a great deal of perfume and kohl and make free use of toothpicks of green arák-wood.  “The Meccan women are extraordinarily beautiful and very pious and modest. They too make great use of perfumes to such a degree that they will spend the night hungry in order to buy perfumes with the price of their food.  “They visit the mosque every Thursday night, wearing their finest apparel; and the whole sanctuary is saturated with the smell of their perfume. When one of these women goes away the odour of the perfume clings to the place after she has gone.”   5. Isfahan  In Isfahan the fair   Surrounded by orchards (Apricots and quinces   Pears and melons) The people out-do one another In banquets “In the preparation for which They display all their resources” One corporation entertained another with viands   Cooked over candles “The guests returned the invitation And cooked their viands with silk.”   6. Delhi  In the Sultan’s apartments   I saw a Júgí Sitting in midair I fell in a faint They had to give me a drink   To revive me  And there he was   Still sitting in midair   His companion Took a sandal from a bag   Beat it on the ground   Til it rose in the air   All by itself and poised   Over the floating one And it began hitting him   On the back of the neck   Until he floated down   And landed.  “I would tell them to do something else,” Said the Sultan, “If I did not fear   For your reason.”   7. Calicut  Chinese vessels at anchor in the harbor   One of the largest in the world. Malabar   Coast of ginger pepper spice Four decks with cabins saloons Merchants of Canton Sumatra Ceylon stay locked in cabins With wives and slave girls Sailors bring their boys to sea Cultivate salads and ginger In wooden vats  In Calicut I missed my boat   To China and my slave Girls were all stolen by the King   Of Sumatra and my companions   Were scattered over China Sumatra and Bengal  When I saw what had happened   I sailed for the Maldives Where all the inhabitants Are Muslims  Live on red fish lightly cooked   Or smoked in palmleaf baskets   It tastes like mutton  These natives wear no pants   Only aprons Bathe twice a day Use sandalwood and do not fight   Their armor is prayer.
				



subjects : Islam, Religion, Activities, Travels & Journeys