title : Days of 1994:  Alexandrians

author : Marilyn Hacker

text : 
for Edmund White
Lunch: as we close the twentieth century,   
death, like a hanger-on or a wanna-be 
            sits with us at the cluttered bistro 
            table, inflecting the conversation. 

Elderly friends take lovers, rent studios,   
plan trips to unpronounceable provinces.   
            Fifty makes the ironic wager 
            that his biographer will outlive him— 

as may the erudite eighty-one-year-old 
dandy with whom a squabble is simmering.   
            His green-eyed architect companion   
            died in the spring. He is frank about his 

grief, as he savors spiced pumpkin soup, and a 
sliced rare filet. We’ll see the next decade in 
            or not. This one retains its flavor. 
            “Her new book ...” “... brilliant!” “She slept with ...” “Really!” 

Long arabesques of silver-tipped sentences   
drift on the current of our two languages   
            into the mist of late September 
            midafternoon, where the dusk is curling 

Just thirty-eight: her last chemotherapy 
treatment’s the same day classes begin again. 
            I went through it a year before she 
            started; but hers was both breasts, and lymph nodes. 

She’s always been a lax vegetarian. 
Now she has cut out butter and cheese, and she   
            never drank wine or beer. What else is   
            there to eliminate? Tea and coffee ... ? 

(Our avocado salads are copious.) 
It’s easier to talk about politics 
            than to allow the terror that shares 
            both of our bedrooms to find words. It made 

the introduction; it’s an acquaintance we’ve   
in common. Trading medical anecdotes 
            helps out when conversation lapses. 
            We don’t discuss Mitterrand and cancer. 

Four months (I say) I’ll see her, see him again.   
(I dream my life; I wake to contingencies.) 
            Now I walk home along the river, 
            into the wind, as the clouds break open.




subjects : Friends & Enemies, Living, Activities, Time & Brevity, Relationships, Eating & Drinking