title : At This Precise Moment of History

author : Thomas James Merton

text : 
					
					1. At this precise moment of history       With Goody-two-shoes running for Congress     We are testing supersonic engines       To keep God safe in the cherry tree.       When I said so in this space last Thursday       I meant what I said: power struggles.  2. You would never dream of such corn. The colonials in       sandalwood like running wide open and available for       protection. You can throw them away without a refund.  3. Dr. Hanfstaengel who was not called Putzi except by       those who did not know him is taped in the national       archives. J. Edgar Hoover he ought to know     And does know.      But calls Dr. Hanfstaengel Putzi nevertheless       Somewhere on tape in the       Archives.      He (Dr. H.) is not a silly man.       He left in disgust     About the same time Shirley Temple     Sat on Roosevelt’s knee       An accomplished pianist     A remembered personality.       He (Dr. H.) began to teach       Immortal anecdotes     To his mother a Queen Bee       In the American colony.  4. What is your attitude toward historical subjects?       —Perhaps it’s their size!  5. When I said this in space you would never believe       Corn Colonel was so expatriated.     —If you think you know,     Take this wheel     And become standard.  6. She is my only living mother     This bee of the bloody arts     Bandaging victims of Saturday’s dance       Like a veritable sphinx     In a totally new combination.  7. The Queen Mother is an enduring vignette          at an early age.     Now she ought to be kept in submersible          decompression chambers      For a while.  8. What is your attitude toward historical subjects       Like Queen Colonies?     —They are permanently fortified     For shape retention.  9. Solid shades       Seven zippered pockets       Close to my old place     Waiting by the road     Big disk brakes     Spinoff     Zoom     Long lights stabbing at the       Two together piggyback       In a stark sports roadster      Regretting his previous outburst       Al loads his Cadillac       With lovenests.  10. She is my only living investment         She examines the housing industry         Counts 3.5 million postwar children         Turning twenty-one       And draws her own conclusion         In the commercial fishing field.  11. Voice of little sexy ventriloquist mignonne:       “Well I think all of us are agreed and sincerely I my-       self believe that honest people on both sides have got         it all on tape. Governor Reagan thinks that nuclear         wampums are a last resort that ought not to be re-       sorted.” (But little mignonne went right to the point         with: “We have a commitment to fulfill and we better         do it quick.” No dupe she!)        All historians die of the same events at least twice.  13. I feel that I ought to open this case with an apology.         Dr. H. certainly has a beautiful voice. He is not a silly         man. He is misunderstood even by Presidents.  14. You people are criticizing the Church but what are         you going to put in her place? Sometime sit down with         a pencil and paper and ask yourself what you’ve got         that the Church hasn’t.  15. Nothing to add       But the big voice of a detective         Using the wrong first names         In national archives.  16. She sat in shocking pink with an industrial zipper spe-       cially designed for sitting on the knees of presidents in         broad daylight. She spoke the president’s mind. “We         have a last resort to be resorted and we better do it         quick.” He wondered at what he had just said.  17. It was all like running wideopen in a loose gown         Without slippers         At least someplace.
				



subjects : History & Politics, Social Commentaries, Popular Culture