title : Confession in a Booth at the Hollow Log Lounge

author : R. T. Smith

text : 
I seam towels for Dundee over in Georgia, 
a non-union sweatshop with a dozen
rows of them blue glass windows all around. 
Some of ’em says it’s like a church. 
Been there fourteen years, since just before 
me and Hubert said vows at Devotee Baptist. 
We’ve been divorced since eighty-four. 
Seems he had another woman on the side. 
Yessir, I been cold and warmed my hands 
at the motor of my jury-rigged machine, 
been Florida-hot and deaf from the fans 
that don’t do a damn bit of earthly good, 
for me at least. I’m right fleshy, as you 
can see. Been so hot I’d get the hives 
and swell up like sourdough rising, but 
I hardly miss a sick day, you understand. 
I hate the feel when another woman’s 
been sewing on my machine. Substitutes 
will break a needle or jack the floating 
bobbin out of line. They don’t give a hoot. 
It ain’t like they got a steady station 
or reputation to uphold. This working’s 
almost a moral thing, Preacher Wilkes 
would say, like marriage, and every thread 
has got to be caught in the hem’s edge 
so the whole towel won’t ravel first time 
some salesman in a motel or shoe clerk
in his own home after a sweaty day
dries off from a cold shower bath. You see, 
I know it don’t take no giant brain 
to sit behind a Singer machine and stitch 
hour after hour, but I’m proud just the same. 
I’m regular as a clock, and I don’t dare fiddle 
with another worker’s machine. Some nights 
I lie in my bed, once was my mother’s, 
and watch the gas flame jump beautiful blue 
as the mill’s windows and wonder how many 
skins have been wiped dry on my towels, 
and whose. It gives me a blushy pride 
right on the edge of sleep. I’m over here 
tonight with my sister Lily and her husband, 
Buddy, supposed to be having a fine time 
instead of talking my whole life at you. 
This country and western band, specially 
the drummer in a blue silk shirt, makes me 
want to eat a hot pig’s foot, drink beer, 
and shake my tail. Let’s show ’em a thing 
or two. You ain’t married just now, are you?




subjects : Jobs & Working, Activities