title : Five Visions of Captain Cook

author : Kenneth Slessor

text : 
I 
          
Cook was a captain of the Admiralty   
When sea-captains had the evil eye, 
Or should have, what with beating krakens off   
And casting nativities of ships; 
Cook was a captain of the powder-days 
When captains, you might have said, if you had been   
Fixed by their glittering stare, half-down the side, 
Or gaping at them up companionways, 
Were more like warlocks than a humble man— 
And men were humble then who gazed at them, 
Poor horn-eyed sailors, bullied by devils’ fists   
Of wind or water, or the want of both,   
Childlike and trusting, filled with eager trust— 
Cook was a captain of the sailing days   
When sea-captains were kings like this,   
Not cold executives of company-rules   
Cracking their boilers for a dividend   
Or bidding their engineers go wink   
At bells and telegraphs, so plates would hold   
Another pound. Those captains drove their ships 
By their own blood, no laws of schoolbook steam,   
Till yards were sprung, and masts went overboard— 
Daemons in periwigs, doling magic out,   
Who read fair alphabets in stars   
Where humbler men found but a mess of sparks,   
Who steered their crews by mysteries 
And strange, half-dreadful sortilege with books,   
Used medicines that only gods could know   
The sense of, but sailors drank 
In simple faith. That was the captain 
Cook was when he came to the Coral Sea   
And chose a passage into the dark. 

How many mariners had made that choice   
Paused on the brink of mystery! ‘Choose now!’   
The winds roared, blowing home, blowing home,   
Over the Coral Sea. ‘Choose now!’ the trades   
Cried once to Tasman, throwing him for choice   
Their teeth or shoulders, and the Dutchman chose   
The wind’s way, turning north. ‘Choose, Bougainville!’   
The wind cried once, and Bougainville had heard   
The voice of God, calling him prudently 
Out of the dead lee shore, and chose the north,   
The wind’s way. So, too, Cook made choice,   
Over the brink, into the devil’s mouth, 
With four months’ food, and sailors wild with dreams   
Of English beer, the smoking barns of home.   
So Cook made choice, so Cook sailed westabout,   
So men write poems in Australia. 


II 

Flowers turned to stone! Not all the botany   
Of Joseph Banks, hung pensive in a porthole,   
Could find the Latin for this loveliness,   
Could put the Barrier Reef in a glass box   
Tagged by the horrid Gorgon squint 
Of horticulture. Stone turned to flowers   
It seemed—you’d snap a crystal twig,   
One petal even of the water-garden, 
And have it dying like a cherry-bough. 
They’d sailed all day outside a coral hedge,   
And half the night. Cook sailed at night,   
Let there be reefs a fathom from the keel   
And empty charts. The sailors didn’t ask, 
Nor Joseph Banks. Who cared? It was the spell   
Of Cook that lulled them, bade them turn below,   
Kick off their sea-boots, puff themselves to sleep,   
Though there were more shoals outside 
Than teeth in a shark’s head. Cook snored loudest himself. 

One day, a morning of light airs and calms,   
They slid towards a reef that would have knifed   
Their boards to mash, and murdered every man. 
So close it sucked them, one wave shook their keel,   
The next blew past the coral. Three officers,   
In gilt and buttons, languidly on deck 
Pointed their sextants at the sun. One yawned,   
One held a pencil, one put eye to lens:   
Three very peaceful English mariners 
Taking their sights for longitude. 
I’ve never heard 
Of sailors aching for the longitude 
Of shipwrecks before or since. It was the spell   
Of Cook did this, the phylacteries of Cook.   
Men who ride broomsticks with a mesmerist   
Mock the typhoon. So, too, it was with Cook. 


III 

Two chronometers the captain had, 
One by Arnold that ran like mad, 
One by Kendal in a walnut case, 
Poor devoted creature with a hangdog face. 

Arnold always hurried with a crazed click-click   
Dancing over Greenwich like a lunatic, 
Kendal panted faithfully his watch-dog beat,   
Climbing out of Yesterday with sticky little feet. 

Arnold choked with appetite to wolf up time,   
Madly round the numerals his hands would climb,   
His cogs rushed over and his wheels ran miles,   
Dragging Captain Cook to the Sandwich Isles. 

But Kendal dawdled in the tombstoned past,   
With a sentimental prejudice to going fast, 
And he thought very often of a haberdasher’s door   
And a yellow-haired boy who would knock no more. 

All through the night-time, clock talked to clock,   
In the captain’s cabin, tock-tock-tock, 
One ticked fast and one ticked slow, 
And Time went over them a hundred years ago. 


IV 

Sometimes the god would fold his wings   
And, stone of Caesars turned to flesh, 
Talk of the most important things 
That serious-minded midshipmen could wish, 

Of plantains, and the lack of rum 
Or spearing sea-cows—things like this   
That hungry schoolboys, five days dumb,   
In jolly-boats are wonted to discuss. 

What midshipman would pause to mourn   
The sun that beat about his ears, 
Or curse the tide, if he could horn 
His fists by tugging on those lumbering oars? 

Let rum-tanned mariners prefer 
To hug the weather-side of yards, 
‘Cats to catch mice’ before they purr,   
Those were the captain’s enigmatic words. 

Here, in this jolly-boat they graced, 
Were food and freedom, wind and storm, 
While, fowling-piece across his waist, 
Cook mapped the coast, with one eye cocked for game. 


V 

After the candles had gone out, and those   
Who listened had gone out, and a last wave   
Of chimney-haloes caked their smoky rings   
Like fish-scales on the ceiling, a Yellow Sea   
Of swimming circles, the old man, 
Old Captain-in-the-Corner, drank his rum 
With friendly gestures to four chairs. They stood   
Empty, still warm from haunches, with rubbed nails   
And leather glazed, like aged serving-men   
Feeding a king’s delight, the sticky, drugged   
Sweet agony of habitual anecdotes. 
But these, his chairs, could bear an old man’s tongue,   
Sleep when he slept, be flattering when he woke,   
And wink to hear the same eternal name   
From lips new-dipped in rum. 

‘Then Captain Cook, 
I heard him, told them they could go 
If so they chose, but he would get them back,   
Dead or alive, he’d have them,’ 
The old man screeched, half-thinking to hear ‘Cook!   
Cook again! Cook! It’s other cooks he’ll need,   
Cooks who can bake a dinner out of pence, 
That’s what he lives on, talks on, half-a-crown   
A day, and sits there full of Cook. 
Who’d do your cooking now, I’d like to ask,   
If someone didn’t grind her bones away? 
But that’s the truth, six children and half-a-crown   
A day, and a man gone daft with Cook.’ 

That was his wife, 
Elizabeth, a noble wife but brisk, 
Who lived in a present full of kitchen-fumes   
And had no past. He had not seen her 
For seven years, being blind, and that of course   
Was why he’d had to strike a deal with chairs, 
Not knowing when those who chafed them had gone to sleep   
Or stolen away. Darkness and empty chairs,   
This was the port that Alexander Home   
Had come to with his useless cutlass-wounds   
And tales of Cook, and half-a-crown a day— 
This was the creek he’d run his timbers to,   
Where grateful countrymen repaid his wounds   
At half-a-crown a day. Too good, too good,   
This eloquent offering of birdcages 
To gulls, and Greenwich Hospital to Cook,   
Britannia’s mission to the sea-fowl. 

It was not blindness picked his flesh away,   
Nor want of sight made penny-blank the eyes   
Of Captain Home, but that he lived like this 
In one place, and gazed elsewhere. His body moved   
In Scotland, but his eyes were dazzle-full   
Of skies and water farther round the world— 
Air soaked with blue, so thick it dripped like snow   
On spice-tree boughs, and water diamond-green, 
Beaches wind-glittering with crumbs of gilt,   
And birds more scarlet than a duchy’s seal   
That had come whistling long ago, and far   
Away. His body had gone back, 
Here it sat drinking rum in Berwickshire, 
But not his eyes—they were left floating there   
Half-round the earth, blinking at beaches milked   
By suck-mouth tides, foaming with ropes of bubbles   
And huge half-moons of surf. Thus it had been   
When Cook was carried on a sailor’s back,   
Vengeance in a cocked hat, to claim his price,   
A prince in barter for a longboat. 
And then the trumpery springs of fate—a stone,   
A musket-shot, a round of gunpowder, 
And puzzled animals, killing they knew not what   
Or why, but killing . . . the surge of goatish flanks   
Armoured in feathers, like cruel birds: 
Wild, childish faces, killing; a moment seen,   
Marines with crimson coats and puffs of smoke   
Toppling face-down; and a knife of English iron,   
Forged aboard ship, that had been changed for pigs,   
Given back to Cook between the shoulder-blades.   
There he had dropped, and the old floundering sea,   
The old, fumbling, witless lover-enemy, 
Had taken his breath, last office of salt water. 

Cook died. The body of Alexander Home 
Flowed round the world and back again, with eyes   
Marooned already, and came to English coasts,   
The vague ancestral darknesses of home, 
Seeing them faintly through a glass of gold,   
Dim fog-shapes, ghosted like the ribs of trees   
Against his blazing waters and blue air. 
But soon they faded, and there was nothing left,   
Only the sugar-cane and the wild granaries   
Of sand, and.palm-trees and the flying blood   
Of cardinal-birds; and putting out one hand   
Tremulously in the direction of the beach,   
He felt a chair in Scotland. And sat down.




subjects : Travels & Journeys, Activities, Seas, Rivers, & Streams, Social Commentaries, History & Politics, Nature