title : Recycling Center

author : Brenda Hillman

text : 
The labeled bins on the California hillside 
catch the glint and quarter-glint of passing cars. 
Families pull up with their interesting trash 
and start unloading: Here, sweetheart, 
this goes over in Newspaper. The bundle 
hits with a thud. Diet soda cans 
spin almost noiselessly down, and the sun- 
permitting bottles from a day’s pleasure 
are tossed into Mixed Glass by the children 
who like to hear the smash, unknowable, chaotic, 
as matter greets itself and starts to change. 

What mystery is inside a thing! If we peered 
into the bin, we could see it waiting there, 
could believe everything is alive and specific 
and personal, could tell by the tilt of one 
bottle against the next that it’s difficult 
to be singular, to have identity, to keep 
an outline safe in the terrors of space. 
Even the child knows this. Bye, bottle! she shouts, 
tossing it in; and the bottle lies there 
in the two o’clock position, temporarily itself, 
before being swept into the destiny of mixture. . . 

And what if some don’t want to. What if some items 
in the piles of paper, the orange and blue 
envelopes from a magazine sweepstakes, numbers 
pressing through the cloudy windows 
with our names, some among those pale sheets curled 
with moisture, would rather stay as they are. 
It’s spring; we’ve thrown away mistakes— 
tax forms, recipes, tennis-ball-sized 
drafts of poems—that which was blank 
shall be made blank again—but what if 
that failed letter wants to be a failure, 
not go back to pulp, and thought .. . 
Or across the parking lot, where light insists 
on changing the dull cans, a few cans don’t want 
to be changed, though they should want to, 
shouldn’t they, should want to be changed 
by light, light which is called sweet reason, 
honeyed, spectra, magnitude, light that goes 
from the parking lot looking helpless 
though it is matter that has been betrayed. . . 

All afternoon the bins are carried off 
by those who know about where things should go, 
who are used to the clatter the cans make, 
pouring out; and the families, who believed change 
would heal them are pulling away in their vans, 
slightly embarrassed by that which refused . . . 
The bins fill again with hard substances, 
the hills bear down with their fugitive gold, 
the pampas grass bending low to protect 
what was briefly certain and alive with hope. 





subjects : Time & Brevity, Living, Social Commentaries