title : Several Errands

author : Brenda Hillman

text : 
The shoe repairman works behind the married shoes, 
his whole hand inside the boot he’s shining, 
everything cozy in the glass displays, laces paired 
on gravel he’s spread out in the window, shoes 
placed as though they’re walking, and beside them 
propped up, the wooden tongues of shoe horns, poised 
to serve the inanimate world ... He comes out mildly 
attentive, soft accent, possibly a Scottish 
childhood, possibly sheep to tend ... Clear day, 
first summer divorced in Berkeley, a time of seamless, indescribable grief; he waits kindly in his blue apron, 
fingering the well-worn inner sole, and I am grateful 
for those who serve us knowing nothing of our lives ... 

* 

The cleaner waits behind the silver bell; 
he’s from Cambodia and has free Christian literature 
on the counter. He greets me with pleasant chatter, 
searches through the coats, some left for years, 
he says; they make a soft blue whistle as they circulate 
on the ovals like the ones under those automatic boats. 
As the clothes pass, little checks and prints under 
the whooshing of motion, I see my husband’s coat— 
how long will I call him my husband—like an old friend 
passing by quickly not bothering to greet me. Odd now, 
I don’t have to pick it up, the serious plaid will go 
around between the women’s suits and stay all night. . . 

* 

I watch the young butcher flipping over the young 
chicken: he takes one wing and sort of spins it, 
first on its back, flinging the trimmed, watery 
lemon-colored fat into the trash, then before 
he starts on the legs he puts his hand so deeply in 
that the finger comes out the neck ... The other butcher 
sets the slab of beef under the saw: the riveting 
intricate swirl as the dead flesh pulls away; 
he goes off, shouts short words from the deep freeze— 
to me or to the carcass hanging by the shank?— 
I can wait, but the spaces can’t, there’s a slight 
ticking, then the carcass swings and swings ... 
Somehow I thought we would know everything 
through the flesh. Perhaps. But my days have become 
spirit. The young butcher splits the chicken 
down the back, seems to enjoy the crack of the knife 
as it enters the bone, so I try to. Housewives lean 
against the cool glass to convey holiday news and he 
responds without really looking up; I love that. 

* 

oh Berkeley summer mornings, aren’t they— 
what? past the French Hotel, the glint of tiny spoons 
so briefly and soberly allowed to rest on white saucers, 
the plums just about over, the agapanthus—“lilies of denial”— 
in the center dividers, blooming, or just about to— 
like me, hearty and hesitant, not wanting to write it, 
not wanting to ruin the perfection of the poem 
by writing it . . . At the dentist, the little mirror, 
the dinosaur prong is put into the mouth. Mouth: 
the first darkness. Nearby: the mobile with straw 
eyeless fishes. The dentist will go home to her family, 
having briefly reached inside the visible mystery 
and found nothing ... I imagine Wisdom in the text 
is like this, creating the cosmos from the mind of God, 
looking interested and competent; she touches 
the physical place with her prong, and the pain shines ... 

(—a man told me I better think 
about my ‘system.’ 
Oh dear! I better 
think about my ‘system’—!)




subjects : Religion, Living, Disappointment & Failure, Cities & Urban Life, Social Commentaries, Separation & Divorce, Activities, Faith & Doubt, Jobs & Working