title : An Arundel Tomb

author : Philip Larkin

text : 
Side by sideSide by side To see a recent photograph of this tomb of the Earl and Countess of Arundel that Larkin is describing, click here. , their faces blurred,   
The earl and countess lie in stone,   
Their proper habitshabits Clothes  vaguely shown   
As jointed armour, stiffened pleat,   
And that faint hint of the absurd—   
The little dogs under their feet. 

Such plainness of the pre-baroque pre-baroque In Larkin’s pronunciation, the phrase rhymes with 'shock.' The Baroque period, exemplified by ornamentation, followed the Renaissance. This tomb was sculpted in the Middle Ages.   
Hardly involves the eye, until 
It meets his left-hand gauntletgauntlet An armored glove, worn in the Middle Ages, still   
Clasped empty in the other; and   
One sees, with a sharp tender shock,   
His hand withdrawn, holding her hand. 

They would not think to lie so long.   
Such faithfulness in effigyeffigy A sculptured likeness 
Was just a detail friends would see: 
A sculptor’s sweet commissioned grace   
Thrown off in helping to prolong   
The Latin names around the base. 

They would not guess how early in 
Their supinesupine On their backs stationary voyage 
The air would change to soundless damage,   
Turn the old tenantry away; 
How soon succeeding eyes begin 
To look, not read. Rigidly they 

Persisted, linked, through lengths and breadths   
Of time. Snow fell, undated. Light 
Each summer thronged the glass. A bright   
Litter of birdcalls strewed the same 
Bone-riddled ground. And up the paths   
The endless altered people came, 

Washing at their identity.   
Now, helpless in the hollow of   
An unarmorial age, a trough 
Of smoke in slow suspended skeinsskeins Used figuratively, a skein is a quantity of thread    
Above their scrap of history,   
Only anOnly an When first published in June 1956 in the London Magazine, the line began: Only their attitude remains: 

Time has transfigured them into   
Untruth. The stone fidelity 
They hardly meant has come to be   
Their final blazonblazon Both a coat of arms, and a public proclamation, and to prove   
Our almost-instinct almost true:   
What will survive of us is love.




subjects : Time & Brevity, Marriage & Companionship, Love, Living, Painting & Sculpture, Arts & Sciences, Relationships, Men & Women, Death, Realistic & Complicated