title : Grace

author : John Logan

text : 
We suffer from the repression of the sublime. —Roberto Assagioli
This artist’s sculptured, open box of mahogany 
(ivory white inside) is strung 
with vertical and horizontal layers of mus- 
ical wires that sing when struck, and bits of bright garnet   
rock tremble where they intersect. 
These gems flash in the candle light, 
and before me all my beloved childhood looms up 
in the humming levels, each one deeper than the other. 
I tip this sculpted box and my child laughs and moves there   
in his own time. You’ll hear me moan: 
Oh, you will hear me moan with all the old, sure pleasure   
of what I’d thought I’d lost come back again. 
Why, we have never left our home! 
On the leather lace fixed about my neck, blue, yellow,   
red and black African trading beads begin to glow:   
their colors all weave and newly flow 
together like translucent and angelic worms. 
And beneath these my neck is as alive with gentle,   
white bees as is a woman’s breast. 
Beside and in the light river 
figures come on stage exactly 
as they are needed. I tell you, I conduct my own   
act! A boy poses so youthfully, 
so beautifully, his slim arms a graceful arrow 
over his small, brown head, and he dives! 
Limbs and body push supple as a whole school of fish.   
And then his vacant place is taken by another— 
a man dressed in denim and in boots of red rubber.   
He is wrenched from the shore and pulled 
through the fresh, bright stream by a kid 
who tugs on one of his hands and holds a fishing rod.   
And, too, this man is dragged in the opposite direction 
by a red dog on a leash shaking his wet 
great coat into the stippled light. 
That man just sashayed: he zigzagged 
this way and that. The man is me! 

A bluejay does a dance for us! 
He hops beside a tree that rises inside of me.   
He half-glides, his iridescent, 
blue back striking like a brush 
of Gauguin on the bare canvas of the air and then:   
he flies! leaving behind him a small, perfect feather,   
which I find shades from blue to brown— 
my brother’s color into mine. 
Now in the space the diver and the booted fellow   
left, my brother and I are there 
fishing together, our poles glinting in the water.   
My mouth moves. My eyes are alive! 
I cry to my brother with joy. 
For that bluejay was a messenger of what I want! 

Gregory my friend and guide on this voyage seems benign.   
He brushes my chest and my stretched, 
naked arms open to the sun 
with a branch of the fragrant pine. 
“Be healed,” he chants with each glancing 
stroke. “Be healed.” The needles prick my skin back into life,   
and I go down to bathe my feet in the stream. The veins   
form a light, mottled web along my white ankle.   
I feel my kinship with the pine, 
the jay, the luminescent stream 
and with him—or is it with her, 
the Mother? Gregory, my oracle, my teacher. 
He leans there in the door of our tent by the river,   
his face glowing, hair long and shining as a woman’s,   
his belly fat with life—pregnant with the two of us:   
my brother and I, unborn twins who lie entangled   
in each other’s developing 
limbs. Soon we will be born! He and I will taste of milk 
for the very first time! And taste of strawberry pop 
and of bright bananas. And we will eat, my brother 
and I, a great, shining, autumn-red apple fallen 
from our father’s tree as if from the long sky, and you 
too will taste this apple with us, 
for we all have the same mother, and her name is Grace. 





subjects : Family & Ancestors, Nature, Relationships, Seas, Rivers, & Streams, The Body, Activities, Travels & Journeys