title : Letter to Brooks: Spring Garden

author : Major Jackson

text : 
1
When you have forgotten (to bring into    
            Play that fragrant morsel of rhetoric, 
Crisp as autumnal air), when you 
            Have forgotten, say, sunlit corners, brick 
            Full of skyline, rowhomes, smokestacks, 
Billboards, littered rooftops & wondered    
What bread wrappers reflect of our hunger, 

2
When you have forgotten wide-brimmed hats, 
            Sunday back-seat leather rides & church, 
The doorlock like a silver cane, the broad backs    
            Swaying or the great moan deep churning, 
            & the shimmer flick of flat sticks, the lurch 
Forward, skip, hands up Aileyesque drop, 
When you have forgotten the meaningful bop, 

3 
Hustlers and their care-what-may, blasé
            Ballet and flight, when you have forgotten 
Scruffy yards, miniature escapes, the way 
            Laundry lines strung up sag like shortened 
            Smiles, when you have forgotten the Fish Man 
Barking his catch in inches up the street    
“I’ve got porgies. I’ve got trout. Feeesh 

4 
Man,” or his scoop and chain scale,    
            His belief in shad and amberjack; when    
You have forgotten Ajax and tin pails, 
            Blue crystals frothing on marble front 
            Steps Saturday mornings, or the garden 
Of old men playing checkers, the curbs    
White-washed like two lines out to the burbs, 

5 
Or the hopscotch squares painted new 
            In the street, the pitter-patter of feet    
Landing on rhymes. “How do you    
            Like the weather, girls? All in together, girls, 
            January, February, March, April... ” 
The jump ropes’ portentous looming, 
Their great, aching love blooming. 

6 
When you have forgotten packs of grape- 
            Flavored Now & Laters, the squares 
Of sugar flattening on the tongue, the elation 
            You felt reaching into the corner-store jar,    
            Grasping a handful of Blow Pops, candy bars 
With names you didn’t recognize but came    
To learn. All the turf battles. All the war games. 

7 
When you have forgotten popsicle stick 
            Races along the curb and hydrant fights,    
Then, retrieve this letter from your stack 
            I’ve sent by clairvoyant post & read by light, 
            For it brought me as much longing and delight. 
This week’s Father’s Day; I’ve a long ride to Philly. 
I’ll give this to Gramps, then head to Black Lily.




subjects : Midlife, Family & Ancestors, Living, Cities & Urban Life, Social Commentaries, Youth, Relationships