title : Going Back

author : Gregory Djanikian

text : 
We have been cruising, half a block   
at a time, my wife, my two children, 
all morning, and I have been pointing out   
unhurriedly and with some feeling   
places of consequence, sacred places,   
backyards, lush fields, garages, alleyways.   
“There,” I say, “by this big cottonwood,   
That’s where I dropped the fly ball, 1959.”   
“And in 1961,” I say, “at this very corner, 
Barry Sapolsky tripped me up with his gym bag.”   
My son has fallen asleep, my daughter   
has been nodding “yes” indiscriminately   
for the last half hour, and my wife 
has the frozen, wide-eyed look of the undead.   
“Maybe lunch,” I say, though I’m making now   
my fourth approach to Curtin Jr. High School,   
yellow-bricked, large-windowed, gothic, 
where Frank Marone preyed on our terror once   
and Janice Lehman walked in beauty.   
“Salute, everyone,” I say, “salute,”   
bringing my hand up to my brow as we pass   
the gilded entrance, “This is where things 
of importance happened,” and I am pulling out   
from under the car seat a photo album   
of old school pictures, “Page 8,” I say,   
“Fred Decker, John Carlson by the bike rack,   
Mr. Burkett … ,” and driving on, following   
the invisible map before my eyes. 
Now we are drifting toward my boyhood house   
and I am showing my wife trellised porches,   
bike routes, more than she’d care to see; 
“Why this longing?” she says, “What about now,   
the kids, our lives together, lunch, me?”   
I give her a kiss and turn right on Cherry   
and there in front of our eyes, barely changed,   
is the house where all my memories converge.   
“Look at the windows of my room,” I say, 
“see, there, the shadowy figure moving behind them?”   
And before anyone can hope to answer,   
I have grabbed my camera, I am snapping   
pictures through the windshield, bricks,   
dormers, railings, fences, streets, all   
are falling thrall to my aim. 
“We could be happy here,” I say, putting   
another roll of film in and beginning 
to nose my car toward Bill Corson’s house.   
“Really, Daddy,” my daughter says; “No chance,”   
my wife tacks on, but all I’m hearing   
is the crack of bats in the neighborhood lot   
and Danny’s pearl-handled cap gun going off   
and the drone of bees around honeysuckle   
and Dewey Waugh’s gravelly voice 
urging on his mower, and the sound 
of wind in the cottonwoods is like water, 
I am coasting, there is time for everything.




subjects : Time & Brevity, Youth, Living, Family & Ancestors, Midlife, Relationships