title : Memories of West Street and Lepke

author : Robert Lowell

text : 
Only teaching on Tuesdays, book-worming 
in pajamas fresh from the washer each morning, 
I hog a whole house on Boston’s 
“hardly passionate Marlborough Street,” 
where even the man 
scavenging filth in the back alley trash cans, 
has two children, a beach wagon, a helpmate, 
and is a “young Republican.” 
I have a nine months’ daughter, 
young enough to be my granddaughter. 
Like the sun she rises in her flame-flamingo infants’ wear. 

These are the tranquillized Fifties, 
and I am forty. Ought I to regret my seedtime?   
I was a fire-breathing Catholic C.O., 
and made my manic statement, 
telling off the state and president, and then   
sat waiting sentence in the bull pen 
beside a Negro boy with curlicues 
of marijuana in his hair. 

Given a year, 
I walked on the roof of the West Street Jail, a short   
enclosure like my school soccer court,   
and saw the Hudson River once a day   
through sooty clothesline entanglements   
and bleaching khaki tenements. 
Strolling, I yammered metaphysics with Abramowitz, 
a jaundice-yellow (“it’s really tan”)   
and fly-weight pacifist, 
so vegetarian, 
he wore rope shoes and preferred fallen fruit.   
He tried to convert Bioff and Brown, 
the Hollywood pimps, to his diet. 
Hairy, muscular, suburban, 
wearing chocolate double-breasted suits, 
they blew their tops and beat him black and blue. 

I was so out of things, I’d never heard 
of the Jehovah’s Witnesses. 
“Are you a C.O.?” I asked a fellow jailbird.   
“No,” he answered, “I’m a J.W.” 
He taught me the “hospital tuck,” 
and pointed out the T-shirted back 
of Murder Incorporated’s Czar Lepke,   
there piling towels on a rack, 
or dawdling off to his little segregated cell full   
of things forbidden the common man: 
a portable radio, a dresser, two toy American   
flags tied together with a ribbon of Easter palm.   
Flabby, bald, lobotomized, 
he drifted in a sheepish calm, 
where no agonizing reappraisal 
jarred his concentration on the electric chair— 
hanging like an oasis in his air 
of lost connections....




subjects : War & Conflict, Midlife, Class, Crime & Punishment, Living, History & Politics, Social Commentaries