title : As

author : Paul Muldoon

text : 
As naught gives way to aught 
and oxhide gives way to chain mail 
and byrnie gives way to battle-ax 
and Cavalier gives way to Roundhead 
and Cromwell Road gives way to the Connaught 
and I Am Curious (Yellow) gives way to I Am Curious (Blue) 
and barrelhouse gives way to Frank’N’Stein 
and a pint of Shelley plain to a pint of India Pale Ale   
I give way to you. 

As bass gives way to baritone 
and hammock gives way to hummock 
and Hoboken gives way to Hackensack 
and bread gives way to reed bed 
and bald eagle gives way to Theobald Wolfe Tone   
and the Undertones give way to Siouxsie Sioux   
and DeLorean, John, gives way to Deloria, Vine,   
and Pierced Nose to Big Stomach 
I give way to you. 

As vent gives way to Ventry 
and the King of the World gives way to Finn MacCool   
and phone gives way to fax 
and send gives way to sned 
and Dagenham gives way to Coventry 
and Covenanter gives way to caribou 
and the caribou gives way to the carbine 
and Boulud’s cackamamie to the cock-a-leekie of Boole   
I give way to you. 

As transhumance gives way to trance 
and shaman gives way to Santa 
and butcher’s string gives way to vacuum pack   
and the ineffable gives way to the unsaid   
and pyx gives way to monstrance 
and treasure aisle gives way to need-blind pew   
and Calvin gives way to Calvin Klein 
and Town and Country Mice to Hanta   
I give way to you. 

As Hopi gives way to Navaho 
and rug gives way to rag 
and Pax Vobiscum gives way to Tampax 
and Tampa gives way to the water bed 
and The Water Babies gives way to Worstward Ho 
and crapper gives way to loo 
and spruce gives way to pine 
and the carpet of pine needles to the carpetbag   
I give way to you. 

As gombeen-man gives way to not-for-profit   
and soft soap gives way to Lynn C. Doyle   
and tick gives way to tack 
and Balaam’s Ass gives way to Mister Ed 
and Songs of Innocence gives way to The Prophet  
and single-prop Bar-B-Q gives way to twin-screw   
and the Salt Lick gives way to the County Line   
and “Mending Wall” gives way to “Build Soil”   
I give way to you. 

As your hummus gives way to your foul madams   
and your coy mistress gives way to “The Flea” 
and flax gives way to W. D. Flackes   
and the living give way to the dead 
and John Hume gives way to Gerry Adams   
and Television gives way to U2 
and Lake Constance gives way to the Rhine   
and the Rhine to the Zuider Zee   
I give way to you. 

As dutch treat gives way to french leave   
and spanish fly gives way to Viagra   
and slick gives way to slack 
and the local fuzz give way to the Feds   
and Machiavelli gives way to make-believe 
and Howards End gives way to A Room with a View  
and Wordsworth gives way to “Woodbine 
Willie” and stereo Nagra to quad Niagara   
I give way to you. 

As cathedral gives way to cavern 
and cookie cutter gives way to cookie 
and the rookies give way to the All-Blacks   
and the shad give way to the smoke shed 
and the roughshod give way to the Black Horse avern 
that still rings true 
despite that T being missing from its sign   
where a little nook gives way to a little nookie   
when I give way to you. 

That Nanook of the North should give way to Man of Aran  
as ling gives way to cod 
and cod gives way to kayak 
and Camp Moosilauke gives way to Club Med   
and catamite gives way to catamaran 
and catamaran to aluminum canoe 
is symptomatic of a more general decline   
whereby a cloud succumbs to a clod 
and I give way to you. 

For as Monet gives way to Juan Gris 
and Juan Gris gives way to Joan Miró 
and Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer gives way to Miramax 
and the Volta gives way to Travolta, swinging the red-hot lead,   
and Saturday Night Fever gives way to Grease 
and the Greeks give way to you know who 
and the Roman IX gives way to the Arabic 9 
and nine gives way, as ever, to zero 
I give way to you.




subjects : Marriage & Companionship, Relationships, Living, Men & Women