title : 1801: Among the Papers of the Envoy to Constantinople

author : Richard Howard

text : 
The writer had settled in England in 1771 on Garrick’s invitation to superintend scene-painting at Drury Lane. The Envoy to Constantinople was the seventh Earl of Elgin, who arranged for the Parthenon frieze to be conveyed to England in 1803.
May it please Lord Elgin, Earl of Kincardine,   
to consider the undersign’d, sole author   
and inventor of the Eidophusikon, 

for the position so lately rejected 
by Mr. Turner. On giving the measure 
of its Effects—calm & storm both, sunset 

or moonlight, the accurate imitation 
of Nature’s sounds: approaching thunder, the dash   
of waves on a pebbly beach, the distant gun— 

my Device was pronounc’d by no less a judge 
than Richard Wilson, R.A.—the same who cried out   
at the sight of Terni Cascade, “O well done, 

water, by God!”—was pronounc’d, I say, by him   
“highly successful in agitated seas,”   
by reason of the high finish carrying 

severally their satellites of color   
into the very center of the Pictures. 
As it happens, your Lordship, I visited 

the same Joseph Turner known to your Lordship   
(I believe) only this week, and found a man   
pacing to and fro before his pale muslin 

on which the sick and wan Sun, in all the doubt   
of darkness, was not allow’d to shed one ray,   
but tears. Even as he work’d, pouring wet paint 

onto paper till it was saturated, 
then tore, then scratch’d, then scrubb’d in a frenzy   
at the sheet, the Whole being chaos, until 

as if by enchantment, the Scene appear’d then,   
great ships gone to pieces in order to fling   
magical oranges on the waves—but I 

digress: even as he shew’d me two books fill’d   
with studies from Nature, several tinted 
on the spot—which he found, he said, much the most 

valuable to him—this Turner discuss’d 
the present urgency of your Lordship’s need   
for an artist who might draw Antiquities, 

with suitable finish, before Removal, 
by your Lordship’s design, from Athens. He said   
he could not, himself, endure the Ideal, 

but enjoy’d and look’d for only litter—why   
even his richest vegetation is confus’d, 
he delights in shingle, debris and mere heaps 

of fallen stone. Upon communicating 
the intelligence that your Lordship’s stipend   
must include assistance to Lady Elgin 

in decorating fire-screens and the like, 
the man turn’d back in some heat to his labor   
upon what I took to be that mysterious 

forest below London Bridge, where great ships ride,   
sails filling or falling, disorder’d too   
by the stress of anchorage, all beautiful 

though wild beneath the Daemonic pressure   
of his inquiry (with so much of the trowel,   
surely a touch more finishing might be borne!). 

Enough of Turner, I have not to speak here 
of him, though what I saw was but the scribbling  
of Painting, surely. What I would say is this: 

I venture to suggest in myself a man 
your Lordship, and my Lady, most certainly,   
might rely upon for accurate Service, 

work of a conclusive polish, not a sketch.   
There is, may I make so bold, a point at which   
in Turner’s Picturesque, as Fuseli says, 

two spiders, caressing or killing each other,   
must have greatly the advantage, in roughness   
of surface and intricacy of motion, 

over every athletic or am’rous   
Symplegma left by the Ancients. I do not 
wish to speak further of the man who renounc’d 

your Lordship’s commission to copy marbles,   
muttering (though plain to hear), “Antiquities 
be damn’d, by Thames’ shore we will die,” and went on 

raking at the sea with his untidy thumb;   
but only to call your Lordship’s kind notice   
and gracious favor, for the appointed task, 

to the creator of the Eidophusikon, 
these many years a loyal British subject,   
Yours, &c. 
       PHILIPPE-JACQUES DE LOUTHERBOURG




subjects : Painting & Sculpture, Arts & Sciences