title : Dockery and Son

author : Philip Larkin

text : 
‘Dockery was junior to you, 
Wasn’t he?’ said the Dean. ‘His son’s here now.’   
Death-suited, visitant, I nod. ‘And do 
You keep in touch with—’ Or remember how   
Black-gowned, unbreakfasted, and still half-tight   
We used to stand before that desk, to give   
‘Our version’ of ‘these incidents last night’?   
I try the door of where I used to live: 

Locked. The lawn spreads dazzlingly wide. 
A known bell chimes. I catch my train, ignored.   
Canal and clouds and colleges subside 
Slowly from view. But Dockery, good Lord,   
Anyone up today must have been born 
In ’43, when I was twenty-one. 
If he was younger, did he get this son 
At nineteen, twenty? Was he that withdrawn 

High-collared public-schoolboy, sharing rooms 
With Cartwright who was killed? Well, it just shows   
How much ... How little ... Yawning, I suppose 
I fell asleep, waking at the fumes 
And furnace-glares of Sheffield, where I changed,   
And ate an awful pie, and walked along   
The platform to its end to see the ranged   
Joining and parting lines reflect a strong 

Unhindered moon. To have no son, no wife,   
No house or land still seemed quite natural.   
Only a numbness registered the shock   
Of finding out how much had gone of life,   
How widely from the others. Dockery, now:   
Only nineteen, he must have taken stock 
Of what he wanted, and been capable 
Of ... No, that’s not the difference: rather, how 

Convinced he was he should be added to! 
Why did he think adding meant increase? 
To me it was dilution. Where do these 
Innate assumptions come from? Not from what   
We think truest, or most want to do: 
Those warp tight-shut, like doors. They’re more a style   
Our lives bring with them: habit for a while, 
Suddenly they harden into all we’ve got 

And how we got it; looked back on, they rear   
Like sand-clouds, thick and close, embodying   
For Dockery a son, for me nothing, 
Nothing with all a son’s harsh patronage.   
Life is first boredom, then fear. 
Whether or not we use it, it goes, 
And leaves what something hidden from us chose,   
And age, and then the only end of age.




subjects : Relationships, Disappointment & Failure, Living, Friends & Enemies, Family & Ancestors, Midlife, Sorrow & Grieving, Death, Parenthood