title : from The Triumph of Love

author : Geoffrey Hill

text : 
I 

Sun-blazed, over Romsley, a livid rain-scarp. 


XIII 

Whose lives are hidden in God? Whose?   
Who can now tell what was taken, or where,   
or how, or whether it was received: 
how ditched, divested, clamped, sifted, over- 
laid, raked over, grassed over, spread around,   
rotted down with leafmould, accepted   
as civic concrete, reinforceable 
base cinderblocks: 
tipped into Danube, Rhine, Vistula, dredged up   
with the Baltic and the Pontic sludge: 
committed in absentia to solemn elevation,   
Trauermusik, musique funèbre, funeral 
music, for male and female 
voices ringingly a cappella, 
made for double string choirs, congregated brass,   
choice performers on baroque trumpets hefting,   
like glassblowers, inventions 
of supreme order? 


XIV 

As to bad faith, Malebranche might argue   
it rests with inattention. Stupidity 
is not admissible. However, the status   
of apprehension remains at issue. 
Some qualities are best 
left unrecognized. Needless to say, 
unrecognized is not 
unacknowledged. Unnamed is not nameless. 


XVII 

If the gospel is heard, all else follows:   
the scattering, the diaspora, 
the shtetlach, ash pits, pits of indigo dye.   
Penitence can be spoken of, it is said, 
but is itself beyond words; 
even broken speech presumes. Those Christian Jews   
of the first Church, huddled sabbath-survivors,   
keepers of the word; silent, inside twenty years,   
doubly outcast: even so I would remember—   
the scattering, the diaspora. 
We do not know the saints. 
His mercy is greater even than his wisdom. 
If the gospel is heard, all else follows. 
We shall rise again, clutching our wounds. 


XXXV 

Even now, I tell myself, there is a language   
to which I might speak and which 
would rightly hear me; 
responding with eloquence; in its turn,   
negotiating sense without insult 
given or injury taken. 
Familiar to those who already know it   
elsewhere as justice, 
it is met also in the form of silence. 


XXIX 

Rancorous, narcissistic old sod—what 
makes him go on? We thought, hoped rather, 
he might be dead. Too bad. So how 
much more does he have of injury time? 


XL 

For wordly, read worldly; for in equity, inequity;   
for religious read religiose; for distinction   
detestation. Take accessible to mean 
acceptable, accommodating, openly servile.   
Is that right, Missis, or is that right? I don’t   
care what I say, do I? 


XLI 

For iconic priesthood, read worldly pique and ambition.   
Change insightfully caring to pruriently intrusive.   
Delete chastened and humbled. Insert humiliated.   
Interpret slain in the spirit as browbeaten to exhaustion.   
For hardness of heart read costly dislike of cant. 


XLII 

Excuse me—excuse me—I did not   
say the pain is lifting. I said the pain is in   
the lifting. No—please—forget it. 


XLIII 

This is quite dreadful—he’s become obsessed. 
There you go, there you go—narrow it down to obsession! 


LI 

Whatever may be meant by moral landscape,   
it is for me increasingly a terrain 
seen in cross-section: igneous, sedimentary,   
conglomerate, metamorphic rock- 
strata, in which particular grace,   
individual love, decency, endurance,   
are traceable across the faults. 


LII 

Admittedly at times this moral landscape   
to my exasperated ear emits 
archaic burrings like a small, high-fenced   
electricity sub-station of uncertain age   
in a field corner where the flies 
gather and old horses shake their sides. 


LXVI 

Christ has risen yet again to their   
ritual supplication. It seems weird   
that the comedy never self-destructs.   
Actually it is strengthened—if   
attenuation is strength. (Donne   
said as much of gold. Come back, 
Donne, I forgive you; and lovely Herbert.)   
But what strange guild is this   
that practises daily 
synchronized genuflection and takes pride   
in hazing my Jewish wife? If Christ   
be not risen, Christians are petty   
temple-schismatics, justly 
cast out of the law. Worse things   
have befallen Israel. But since he is   
risen, he is risen even for these   
high-handed underlings of self- 
worship: who, as by obedience,   
proclaim him risen indeed. 


LXVII 

Instruct me further in your travail,   
blind interpreter. Suppose I cannot   
unearth what it was they buried: research   
is not anamnesis. Nor is this a primer   
of innocence exactly. Did the centurion   
see nothing irregular before the abnormal   
light seared his eyeballs? Why do I   
take as my gift a wounded and wounding   
introspection? The rule is clear enough: last   
alleluias forte, followed by indifferent   
coffee and fellowship. 


LXIX 

What choice do you have? These are false questions.   
Fear is your absolute, yet in each feature   
infinitely variable, Manichean beyond dispute,   
for you alone, the skeletal maple, a loose wire   
tapping the wind. 


LXX 

Active virtue: that which shall contain   
its own passion in the public weal—   
do you follow?—or can you at least   
take the drift of the thing? The struggle   
for a noble vernacular: this 
did not end with Petrarch. But where is it?   
Where has it got us? Does it stop, in our case,   
with Dryden, or, perhaps, 
Milton’s political sonnets?—the cherished stock   
hacked into ransom and ruin; the voices   
of distinction, far back, indistinct.   
Still, I’m convinced that shaping, 
voicing, are types of civic action. Or, slightly   
to refashion this, that Wordsworth’s two   
Prefaces stand with his great tract   
on the Convention of Cintra, witnessing   
to the praesidium in the sacred name 
of things betrayed. Intrinsic value 
I am somewhat less sure of. It seems   
implicate with active virtue but I cannot   
say how, precisely. Partaking of both 
fact and recognition, it must be, therefore,   
in effect, at once agent and predicate:   
imponderables brought home   
to the brute mass and detail of the world;   
there, by some, to be pondered. 


XCVI 

Ignorant, assured, there comes to us a voice—   
Unchallengeable—of the foundations, 
distinct authority devoted 
to indistinction. With what proximity 
to justice stands the record of mischance, 
heroic hit-or-miss, the air 
so full of flak and tracer, legend says, 
you pray to live unnoticed. Mr Ives 
took Emersonian self-reliance the whole   
way on that. Melville, half-immolated,   
rebuilt the pyre. Hoist, some time later,   
stumbled on dharma. What can I say?— 
At worst and best a blind ennoblement,   
flood-water, hunched, shouldering at the weir,   
the hatred that is in the nature of love. 


CXVIII 

By default, as it so happens, here we have   
good and bad angels caught burning   
themselves characteristic antiphons;   
and here the true and the false   
shepherds discovered 
already deep into their hollow debate.   
Is that all? No, add spinners of fine   
calumny, confectioners of sugared 
malice; add those who find sincerity   
in heartless weeping. Add the pained,   
painful clowns, brinksmen of perdition.   
Sidney: best realizer and arguer 
of music, that ‘divine 
striker upon the senses’, steady my   
music to your Augustinian grace-notes,   
with your high craft of fret. I am glad   
to have learned how it goes 
with you and with Italianate- 
Hebraic Milton: your voices pitched exactly—   
somewhere—between Laus Deo and defiance. 


CXIX 

And yes—bugger you, MacSikker et al.,—I do   
mourn and resent your desolation of learning:   
Scientia that enabled, if it did not secure,   
forms of understanding, far from despicable,   
and furthest now, as they are most despised.   
By understanding I understand diligence   
and attention, appropriately understood 
as actuated self-knowledge, a daily acknowledgement   
of what is owed the dead. 


CXX 

As with the Gospels, which it is allowed to resemble,   
in Measure for Measure moral uplift 
is not the issue. Scrupulosity, diffidence, 
shrill spirituality, conviction, free expression,   
come off as poorly as deceit or lust. 
The ethical motiv is—so we may hazard—   
opportunism, redemptive and redeemed;   
case-hardened on case-law, casuistry’s 
own redemption; the general temper 
a caustic equity. 


CXXI 

So what is faith if it is not 
inescapable endurance? Unrevisited, the ferns 
are breast-high, head-high, the days   
lustrous, with their hinterlands of thunder.   
Light is this instant, far-seeing   
into itself, its own 
signature on things that recognize   
salvation. I 
am an old man, a child, the horizon   
is Traherne’s country. 


CXLVII 

To go so far with the elaborately- 
vested Angel of Naked Truth:   
and where are we, finally? Don’t   
say that—we are nowhere   
finally. And nowhere are you—   
nowhere are you—any more—more   
cryptic than a schoolyard truce. Cry   
Kings, Cross, or Crosses, cry Pax,   
cry Pax, but to be healed. But to be   
healed, and die! 


CXLVIII 

Obnoxious means, far back within itself,   
easily wounded. But vulnerable, proud   
anger is, I find, a related self 
of covetousness. I came late 
to seeing that. Actually, I had to be 
shown it. What I saw was rough, and still   
pains me. Perhaps it should pain me more.   
Pride is our crux: be angry, but not proud   
where that means vainglorious. Take Leopardi’s   
words or—to be accurate—BV’s English   
cast of them: when he found Tasso’s poor   
scratch of a memorial barely showing 
among the cold slabs of defunct pomp. It   
seemed a sad and angry consolation. 
So—Croker, MacSikker, O’Shem—I ask you:   
what are poems for? They are to console us 
with their own gift, which is like perfect pitch.   
Let us commit that to our dust. What 
ought a poem to be? Answer, a sad   
and angry consolation. What is   
the poem? What figures? Say,   
a sad and angry consolation. That’s   
beautiful. Once more? A sad and angry   
consolation. 


CXLIX 

Obstinate old man—senex 
sapiens, it is not. Is he still 
writing? What is he writing now? He   
has just written: I find it hard 
to forgive myself. We are immortal. Where   
was I?— 


CL 

Sun-blazed, over Romsley, the livid rain-scarp.




subjects : Religion, History & Politics, Social Commentaries, Christianity