title : On Quaking Bog

author : Ben Belitt

text : 
for Jean Brockway
When the walkers-on-water went under,   
the bog-walkers came out of the barberry   
thickets, booted in gum to their hips,   
in a corona of midges, their ears electric   
with sound, beating the stale of the swamp   
with their whips and flailing the ground   
for the itch under the frond, the fern’s   
demonology, the mosquito’s decibel. 

Night-sweat clotted their palms. They tasted 
their gall. The sumac flickered a swatch 
of its leaves in the lichens and venoms, 
a dazzle was seen in the fog 
as a vegetal world gave way to a uterine, 
pitch pulled at their heels and blackened 
their knuckles, the bog-laurel’s fan 
opened its uttermost decimal and showed them the Bog. 

Paradisal, beyond purpose or menace, dewed   
like the flesh of an apple with the damp 
of creation, the disk of the pond glowed 
under the dragonfly’s bosses, where a faulting   
of glaciers had left it—vaults of bog-rosemary,   
buckbean and Labrador tea, a dapple 
of leavening mosses soaking in ice-water, peat-wicks   
feeding their gas to the cranberry braziers. 

They entered the bonfire together. The moss   
took their weight like a trampoline: 
they walked on the sponge and bitumen without   
leaving a footprint. In between, 
in the vats of mat-roses where the waterline   
closed like a skin, the ambiguous 
world of imbalance, non-being, the pre-human   
and tentative, was one with the ludicrous. 

The quaking began—under their bootsoles   
at first, like a whale under ambergris, 
then cramming their wrists with a drummer’s   
vibrations, knocking their ribs and their knees 
as all sagged and rebounded. They lurched on the wet   
as though tracing a profile of breakers 
or displacing the cords and the voids of a net,   
and staggered back into their childhoods, 

till their feet touched the granite again. 
The bog tossed them over the threshold 
that opened a path in the spruce toward the opposite   
edges. The leaves closed behind them. They walked 
an unyielding and tangible world like strangers, remembering   
only the hovering glare where the pitcher-plant’s 
hammer closed on the fly—the light shaking and shaking— 
as a pulse touched their feet from below, and passed over. 





subjects : Nature, Trees & Flowers, Landscapes & Pastorals, Seas, Rivers, & Streams, Activities, Travels & Journeys