title : Tea Party

author : Joanie Mackowski

text : 
Ray Way, Thunderbird Homeagain, 
                            Hugh and Mia Galore: 
they enjoyed such conversational topics 
                            as Mozart, tobacco, and four. 

“Today’s peach boasts rare fuzz,” said Ray. 
                            Bird added, “My mind is whale.” 
Mia forgot her songbooks, but Hugh 
                            said, “Let me embrace you all.” 

Ray Way snagged Homeagain by the lapel 
                            and fastened on Home’s left blue eye, 
Mia saw Home’s green right eye unanchor 
                            and wander away for the sky. 

Then Ray, he let go of Home’s lapel, 
                            and Ray let go of his ire, 
and Ray let go the floor with his feet 
                            to hover a bit on the air. 

Hours ticked while oars pulled 
                            over Lake Eekoutaheart. 
The pelicans kept to their quiet perusals 
                            of fishes, where the ripples teased apart.   

“Please heal my ruptured soul,” said Mia. 
                            Ray cheered, “The half-life got lived.” 
Thunder again, he just picked at his sweater 
                            where the yarn and his arms unweaved. 

“The sky, it must be adhesive,” said Mia, 
                            “elsewise the pelicans would fall—” 
Way, still floating, looked her cool in her eye: 
                            “Feel my faulty heart: it’s full.” 

“So tell me, do you wonder about the crackers 
                            once you lock the pantry?” 
“I know God when I wash my hands.” 
                            “Nothing makes sense like entropy.” 

“And the pelican, does it unloose its eggs 
                            like snow, an unbreakable good?” 
“And does love shape the snow to hope’s ellipses? 
                            “Who warms the nest—who could?” 

“What’s next when your own eyes won’t let you go?” 
                            “But the clouds won’t let me fall.” 
Hugh stood up and repeated, softly: 
                            “Let me embrace you all.”




subjects : Friends & Enemies, Relationships