title : corydon & alexis

author : D. A. Powell

text : 
shepherdboy?   not the most salient image for contemporary readers 
nor most available.   unless you’re thinking brokeback mountain: 
a reference already escaping.   I did love a montana man, though no 
      good shepherd 

rather: a caveman, came spelunking into that grotto I’d retreated to 

what light he bore illumined such small space—physically, temporally 

and did he have a grove of beech trees?   no, no grove 
but together we found an old-growth stand of   redwood 

we gouged each other’s chests instead of wood:   pledges that faded 
he was not cruel nor I unwitting.   but what endures beyond any 
      thicket? 


example: he took me to the ocean to say farewell.   I mean me: farewell 
      to ocean 
the ocean, for that matter, to me.   us both fatigued, showing signs 
      of wreckage 

and that man I had loved stood back from the edge of things 

he did not hold me 

I expected not to be held 

we all understood one another: shepherd understudy, ocean, me 


and did he go back to his fields and caves?   yes, but they were gone 
strip-mining, lumber, defoliant, sterile streams: you knew that was 
      coming 

weren’t we taught some starched sermon: the pasture awaits us 
      elsewhere 


back up a moment: the forest you mentioned—remember, instead of a grove? 

untouched for the most part.   some human damage, but not ours 

we left no mark, not there in the midst of those great trees:    
not in the concentric rings that might have held us far past living 

instead, I put that man, like so many others, on paper— 
a tree already gone from sight where once it had drawn the eyes 
upward: the crest of a mountain.   crumpled thoughts, crumpled love 


shepherdboy, do you see the wild fennel bulbs I gathered for you 
olallieberries, new-mown grass, the tender fruits of   the coastal fig? 

I put them on paper, too, so fragile.   for nothing is ever going to last 


                                                                               For Haines Eason




subjects : Nature, Relationships, Arts & Sciences, Love, The Body, Poetry & Poets, Heartache & Loss