title : Simone Weil: The Year of Factory Work (1934-1935)

author : Edward Hirsch

text : 
A glass of red wine trembles on the table,   
Untouched, and lamplight falls across her shoulders. 

She looks down at the cabbage on her plate,   
She stares at the broken bread. Proposition: 

The irreducible slavery of workers. “To work   
In order to eat, to eat in order to work.” 

She thinks of the punchclock in her chest, 
Of night deepening in the bindweed and crabgrass, 

In the vapors and atoms, in the factory   
Where a steel vise presses against her temples 

Ten hours per day. She doesn’t eat. 
She doesn’t sleep. She almost doesn’t think 

Now that she has brushed against the bruised   
Arm of oblivion and tasted the blood, now 

That the furnace has labelled her skin 
And branded her forehead like a Roman slave’s. 

Surely God comes to the clumsy and inefficient,   
To welders in dark spectacles, and unskilled 

Workers who spend their allotment of days   
Pulling red-hot metal bobbins from the flames. 

Surely God appears to the shattered and anonymous,   
To the humiliated and afflicted 

Whose legs are married to perpetual motion   
And whose hands are too small for their bodies. 

Proposition: “Through work man turns himself   
Into matter, as Christ does through the Eucharist. 

Work is like a death. We have to pass   
Through death. We have to be killed.” 

We have to wake in order to work, to labor   
And count, to fail repeatedly, to submit 

To the furious rhythm of machines, to suffer   
The pandemonium and inhabit the repetitions, 

To become the sacrificial beast: time entering   
Into the body, the body entering into time. 

She presses her forehead against the table:   
To work in order to eat, to eat . . . 

Outside, the moths are flaring into stars 
And stars are strung like beads across the heavens. 

Inside, a glass of red wine trembles 
Next to the cold cabbage and broken bread. 

Exhausted night, she is the brimming liquid   
And untouched food. Come down to her.




subjects : Arts & Sciences, Philosophy, Social Commentaries, Money & Economics, Jobs & Working, Activities