title : Drawings: For John Who Said to Write about True Love

author : Lorna Dee Cervantes

text : 
“The writer. It’s a cul-de-sac,” you wrote that 
winter of our nation’s discontent. That first time 
I found you, blue marble lying still in the trench, you, staked 
in waiting for something, anything but the cell of your small 
apartment with the fixtures never scrubbed, the seven great 
named cats you gassed in the move. I couldn’t keep them. 
You explained so I understood. And what cat never loved 
your shell-like ways, the claw of your steady fingers, firme 
from the rasping of banjos and steady as it goes 
from the nose to the hair to the shaking tip. My favorite 
tale was of the owl and the pussycat in love in a china cup 
cast at sea, or in a flute more brittle, more lifelike 
and riddled with flair, the exquisite polish of its gaudy 
glaze now puzzled with heat cracks, now foamed 
opalescent as the single espresso dish you bought from 
Goodwill. What ever becomes of the heart our common 
child fashioned, red silk and golden satin, the gay glitter 
fallen from moves, our names with Love written in black 
felt pen? Who gets what? Who knows what becomes of the 
rose you carried home from Spanish Harlem that morning 
I sat waiting for the surgeon’s suction. What ever becomes 
of waiting and wanting, when the princess isn’t ready and 
the queen has missed the boat, again? Do you still write 
those old remarks etched on a page of Kandinsky’s ace 
letting go? Like: Lorna meets Oliver North and she 
kicks his butt. The dates are immaterial to me as 
salvation or a freer light bending through stallions 
in an air gone heavy with underground tunnels. Do you 
read me? Is there some library where you’ll find me, smashed 
on the page of some paper? Let it go is my morning mantra 
gone blind with the saved backing of a clock, now dark 
as an empty womb when I wake, now listening for your tick 
or the sound of white walls on a sticky street. Engines out 
the window remind me of breathing apparatus at the breaking 
of new worlds, the crash and perpetual maligning of the sand 
bar where sea lions sawed up logs for a winter cabin. I dream 
wood smoke in the morning. I dream the rank and file of used 
up chimneys, what that night must have smelled like, her mussed 
and toweled positioning, my ambulance of heart through stopped 
traffic where you picked the right corner to tell me: They think 
someone murdered her. You were there, all right, you were 
a statue carved from the stone of your birth. You were patient 
as a sparrow under leaf and as calm as the bay those light 
evenings when I envisioned you with the fishwife you loved. 
And yes, I could have done it then, kissed it off, when the scalpel 
of single star brightened and my world blazed, a dying bulb 
for the finger of a socket, like our sunsets on the Cape, fallen 
fish blood in snow, the hearts and diamonds we found and left 
alone on a New England grave. Why was the summer so long 
then? Even now a golden season stumps me and I stamp 
ants on the brilliant iced drifts. I walk a steady mile 
to that place where you left it, that solid gold band 
thrown away to a riptide in a gesture the theatrical 
love—so well. What was my role? Or did I leave it 
undelivered when they handed me the gun of my triggered 
smiles and taught me to cock it? Did I play it to the hilt 
and bleeding, did I plunge in your lap and wake to find you 
lonely in a ribbon of breathing tissue? Does this impudent 
muscle die? Does love expire? Do eternal nestings mean much 
more than a quill gone out or the spit? I spy the bank 
of frothed fog fuming with airbrushed pussies on a pink 
horizon. I scored my shoes with walking. My skill is losing. 
It’s what we do best, us ducks, us lessons on what not 
to do. 
                     Thanks for the crack, 
                                                               you wrote 
in my O.E.D. that 30th renewal when the summer snapped 
and hissed suddenly like a bullet of coal flung from a fire 
place or a dumb swallow who dove into the pit for pay. Kiss 
her, and it’s good luck. I palm this lucky trade but the soot 
never sells and I never sailed away on a gulf stream that divides 
continents from ourselves. But only half of me is cracked, the 
other is launched on a wild bob, a buoy, steadfast in storm. I may 
sail to Asia or I might waft aimlessly to Spain where my hemp 
first dried from the rain. My messages wring from the line, 
unanswered, pressed sheets from an old wash or the impression 
of a holy thing. But don’t pull no science on this shroud, the 
date will only lie. She’ll tell you it’s sacred, even sell you 
a piece of the fray. She appears on the cracked ravines of this 
country like a ghost on the windshield of an oncoming 
train. She refuses to die, but just look at her nation 
without a spare penny to change. My wear is a glass made 
clean through misuse, the mishandling of my age as revealing 
as my erased face, Indian head of my stick birth, my battle 
buried under an island of snow I’ve yet to get to. What could I do 
with this neighborhood of avenues scattered with empty shells 
of mailboxes, their feet caked with cement like pulled up 
pilings? Evidently, they haven’t a word 
                                                       for regret 
                                                                     full heart. 
Someday, I said, I can write us both from this mess. But the key 
stalls out from under me when I spell your name. I have to fake 
the O or go over it again in the dark, a tracing of differences 
spilled out on a sheet. If I could stick this back 
together, would it stay? It’s no rope, I know, and no good 
for holding clear liquid. I gather a froth on my gums, and grin 
the way an old woman grimaces in a morning mirror. I was never 
a clear thing, never felt the way a daughter feels, never lost 
out like you, never drove. My moon waits at the edge 
of an eagle’s aerie, almost extinct and the eggs are fragile 
from poisoned ignitions. I’m never coming out from my cup 
of tea, never working loose the grease in my hair, the monkey 
grease from my dancing elbows that jab at your shoulder. 
But I write, and wait for the book to sell, for I know 
nothing comes of it but the past with its widening teeth, 
with its meat breath baited at my neck, persistent as the smell 
of a drunk. Don’t tell me. I already know. It’s just the rule of 
the game for the jack of all hearts, and for the queen of baguettes; 
it’s a cul-de-sac for a joker drawing hearts.




subjects : Living, Disappointment & Failure, Love, Separation & Divorce, Relationships, Men & Women, Parenthood, Realistic & Complicated