title : a 340 dollar horse and a hundred dollar whore

author : Charles Bukowski

text : 
don’t ever get the idea I am a poet; you can see me 
at the racetrack any day half drunk 
betting quarters, sidewheelers and straight thoroughs, 
but let me tell you, there are some women there 
who go where the money goes, and sometimes when you 
look at these whores these onehundreddollar whores 
you wonder sometimes if nature isn’t playing a joke 
dealing out so much breast and ass and the way 
it’s all hung together, you look and you look and 
you look and you can’t believe it; there are ordinary women 
and then there is something else that wants to make you 
tear up paintings and break albums of Beethoven 
across the back of the john; anyhow, the season 
was dragging and the big boys were getting busted, 
all the non-pros, the producers, the cameraman, 
the pushers of Mary, the fur salesman, the owners 
themselves, and Saint Louie was running this day: 
a sidewheeler that broke when he got in close; 
he ran with his head down and was mean and ugly 
and 35 to 1, and I put a ten down on him. 
the driver broke him wide 
took him out by the fence where he’d be alone 
even if he had to travel four times as far, 
and that’s the way he went it 
all the way by the outer fence 
traveling two miles in one 
and he won like he was mad as hell 
and he wasn’t even tired, 
and the biggest blonde of all 
all ass and breast, hardly anything else 
went to the payoff window with me. 

that night I couldn’t destroy her 
although the springs shot sparks 
and they pounded on the walls. 
later she sat there in her slip 
drinking Old Grandad 
and she said 
what’s a guy like you doing 
living in a dump like this? 
and I said 
I’m a poet 

and she threw back her beautiful head and laughed. 

you? you . . . a poet? 

I guess you’re right, I said, I guess you’re right. 

but still she looked good to me, she still looked good, 
and all thanks to an ugly horse 
who wrote this poem.




subjects : Relationships, Pets, Arts & Sciences, Sports & Outdoor Activities, Men & Women, Activities, Poetry & Poets