title : Fragments: Mrs. Reuben Chandler writes to her husband during a cholera epidemic

author : Anne Stevenson

text : 
note: Most of this journal, written on shipboard, seems to have been destroyed, probably by fire. What remains suggests that Mrs. Chandler journeyed to New Orleans without her husband's permission, thus becoming indirectly the cause of her baby's death.
August, 1849                      EN ROUTE FROM NEW YORK TO NEW ORLEANS 
                                        ABOARD THE 'GENERAL WAYNE' 

Two weeks aboard the 'General Wayne' 
is little more than a floating hospital 
         vomiting spells. I attribute them to 
            is truly ill. For two days he has 
               in his bunk. 
                   Belle seems to recover. At least 
                      fretful which indicates improvement. 
                   struck by a nervous disorder. 
I sleep very little and take no solid food. 
                                                          (page torn) 

(Second page) 
Yesterday evening poor little Cookie died. 
She was seized suddenly with spasms, poor thing, 
and died in an hour. You will accuse me of 
                        but it was truly frightful. 
                        I have not slept for weeping. 
                                 only a dog! 
                                                          (page torn) 

(Third page) 
       arrived safely in New Orleans but 
          embark. We are all in quarantine 
             might be better, but Belle is 
                all day by her bedside. Doctor 
                   plague and gives me no hope 
                      pray for survival. 
                                                          (page torn) 

(Fourth page) 
       have not been able to put pen to 
                   all over. Our dear little girl 
                   among the blessed, my beautiful 
                         authorities let no one near. 
                         darkies. I am full of 
               one who was without fault and so, 
                         lies shrouded in my sister's 
                              blame God and myself, dear 
                     why you have left me without support? 
                                                          (page torn)




subjects : Activities, Travels & Journeys