title : A Test of Poetry

author : Charles Bernstein

text : 
What do you mean by rashes of ash? Is industry 
systematic work, assiduous activity, or ownership 
of factories? Is ripple agitate lightly? Are 
we tossed in tune when we write poems? And 
what or who emboss with gloss insignias of air? 

Is the Fabric about which you write in the epigraph 
of your poem an edifice, a symbol of heaven? 

Does freight refer to cargo of lading carried 
for pay by water, land or air? Or does it mean 
payment for such transportation? Or a freight 
train? When you say a commoded journey, 
do you mean a comfortable journey or a good train 
with well-equipped commodoties? But, then, why 
do you drop the ‘a’ before slumberous friend? And 
when you write, in “Why I Am Not a Christian” 
You always throw it down / But you never 
pick it up—what is it?? 

In “The Harbor of Illusion”, does vein 
refer to a person's vein under his skin or 
is it a metaphor for a river? Does lot 
mean one’s fate or a piece of land? 
And does camphor refer to camphor trees? 
Moreover, who or what is nearing. Who or 
what has fell?   Or does fell refer to the 
skin or hide of an animal? And who or what has   
stalled? Then, is the thoroughfare of 
noon's atoll an equivalent of the template? 

In "Fear of Flipping" does flipping mean 
crazy? 

How about strain, does it mean 
a severe trying or wearing pressure or 
effect (such as a strain of hard work), 
or a passage, as in piece of music? 
Does Mercury refer to a brand of oil? 

In the lines 
shards of bucolic pastry anchored 
against cactus cabinets, Nantucket buckets 
could we take it as—pieces of pies 
or tarts are placed in buckets (which 
are made of wood from Nantucket) 
anchored against cabinets (small 
rooms or furniture?) with cactus? 

What is nutflack? 

I suppose the caucus of caucasians 
refers to the white people’s meeting 
of a political party to nominate candidates. 
But who is Uncle Hodgepodge? 
And what does familiar freight 
to the returning antelope mean? 

You write, the walls are our floors. 
How can the walls be floors if the floors 
refer to the part of the room which forms 
its enclosing surface and upon which one 
walks? In and the floors, like balls, 
repel all falls—does balls refer to 
nonsense or to any ball like a basket ball 
or to guys? Or to a social assembly for 
dancing? Falls means to descend 
from higher to a lower 
or to drop down wounded or dead? 
But what is the so-called overall 
mesh? 

Is the garbage heap the garbage heap 
in the ordinary sense? Why does 
garbage heap exchange for so-called 
overall mesh? Since a faker is 
one who fakes, how can 
arbitrary reduce to faker? 

Who or what are disappointed 
not to have been? 

Does frames refer to form, constitution, 
or structure in general? Or to a 
particular state, as of the mind? 

In the sentence, 
If you don't like it
colored in, you can always xerox it 
and see it all gray 
--what is it? What does 
colored in mean? 

A few lines later you write, 
You mean, image farm when you’ve got bratwurst— 
Does bratwurst refer to sausage? 
Does the line mean—the sausage 
you saw reminded you of a farm which you imagined? 

Does fat-bottom boats refer to boats with thick bottoms? 
Is humble then humped used to describe the actions of one 
who plays golf? In the phrase a sideshow freak— 
the freak refers to a hippie? Sideshow refers to secondary 
importance? Or an abnormal actor in the sideshow? 
Then, who or what is linked with steam of pink. And 
how about the tongue-tied tightrope stalker— 
does the stalker refer to one who is pursuing 
stealthily in the act of hunting game? The stalker 
is a witness at first and then a witless witness? 

You write The husks are salted: 
what kind of nut husks can be salted for eating? 
What does bending mean—to become curved, 
crooked, or bent? Or to bow down in submission 
or reverence, yield, submit? Does bells 
refer to metallic sounding instruments or 
a kind of trousers? 

Just a few lines later you have the phrase 
Felt very poured. Who felt poured? Toys? 
Is humming in the sense of humming a song? 
Stepped into where? Not being part of what? 

In “No Pastrami” (Walt! I’m with you in Sydney / Where 
the echoes of Mamaroneck howl / Down the outback’s 
pixilating corridors)—does the pastrami refer 
to a highly seasoned shoulder cut of beef? Is 
Mamaroneck a place in the U.S. where wild oxes howl? 
I take it corridors refers to the passageway 
in the supermarket? Could I read the poem as— 
The speaker is doing shopping in a supermarket 
in Sydney; he is walking along the eccentric   
passageways among the shelves on which goods 
are placed; he does not want to buy the pastrami 
as he seems to have heard the echoes of wild oxes 
howling in the U.S. while he addresses Walt Whitman? 

In “No End to Envy”, does the envy refer to admire or 
in the bad sense?




subjects : Arts & Sciences, Reading & Books, Poetry & Poets, Language & Linguistics