title : Gwendolyn Brooks

author : Haki Madhubuti

text : 
she doesn’t wear 
costume jewelry 
& she knew that walt disney 
was/is making a fortune off 
false-eyelashes and that time magazine is the 
authority on the knee/grow. 
her makeup is total-real. 

a negro english instructor called her: 
       “a fine negro poet.” 
a whi-te critic said: 
       “she’s a credit to the negro race.” 
somebody else called her; 
       “a pure negro writer.” 
johnnie mae, who’s a senior in high school said: 
       “she and Langston are the only negro poets we’ve 
       read in school and i understand her.” 
pee wee used to carry one of her poems around in his 
    back pocket; 
       the one about being cool. that was befo pee wee 
       was cooled by a cop’s warning shot. 

into the sixties 
a word was born . . . . . . . . BLACK 
& with black came poets 
& from the poet’s ball points came: 
black doubleblack purpleblack blueblack beenblack was 
black daybeforeyesterday blackerthan ultrablack super 
black blackblack yellowblack niggerblack blackwhi-te- 
       man 
blackthanyoueverbes ¼ black unblack coldblack clear 
black my momma’s blackerthanyourmomma pimpleblack 
       fall 
black so black we can’t even see you black on black in 
black by black technically black mantanblack winter 
black coolblack 360degreesblack coalblack midnight 
black black when it’s convenient rustyblack moonblack 
black starblack summerblack electronblack spaceman 
black shoeshineblack jimshoeblack underwearblack ugly 
black auntjimammablack, uncleben’srice black 
       williebest 
black blackisbeautifulblack i justdiscoveredblack negro 
black unsubstanceblack. 

and everywhere the 
lady “negro poet” 
appeared the poets were there. 
they listened & questioned 
& went home feeling uncomfortable/unsound & so- 
       untogether 
they read/re-read/wrote & rewrote 
& came back the next time to tell the 
lady “negro poet” 
how beautiful she was/is & how she helped them 
& she came back with: 
       how necessary they were and how they’ve helped her. 
the poets walked & as space filled the vacuum between 
       them & the 
lady “negro poet” 
u could hear one of the blackpoets say: 
       “bro, they been calling that sister by the wrong name.”




subjects : Arts & Sciences, Social Commentaries, Race & Ethnicity, Poetry & Poets