title : James Schuyler

author : David Trinidad

text : 
I went to his sixty-sixth birthday 
dinner: sixteen years ago this past 
November. I remember that it was at 
Chelsea Central (his favorite restaurant: 
great steaks) on 10th Avenue, and 
that Ashbery was there, and a few 
others, including Joe, impeccably 
dressed and gracious, who picked up 
what must have been (I thought 
at the time) an exorbitant bill. 

I remember him saying more than 
once, “Joe always picks up the bill,” 
then smiling a slightly wicked smile. 

Sitting with him (those excruciating 
silences!) in his room at the Chelsea, 
my eyes would wander from his book- 
shelves (The Portrait of a Lady stood out) 
to the pan of water on the radiator 
to the records strewn on the floor 
to some scraggly plants (ivy? herbs?) 
in ceramic pots at the base of the French 
doors that opened to the balcony and 
balustrade and sound of traffic on 23rd 
Street six floors below. He read me 
“White Boat, Blue Boat” shortly after he 
wrote it, and a poem about Brook Benton 
singing “Rainy Night in Georgia” that 
didn’t make it into his Last Poems, though 
I remember thinking it beautiful. He 
complained, in a letter to Tom, about 
how much I smoked, and how emotional 
I’d get during movies: he must have been 
referring to Field of Dreams (he had a yen 
for Kevin Costner). When he took me 
to see L'Atalante, a film he loved, I was 
bored. Once, we took the subway (he 
hadn’t ridden it in years) to the Frick; 
I remember admiring Romney’s Lady 
Hamilton. It hurt that he didn’t invite 
me to the dinner after his Dia reading 
or to the reception after his reading at the 
92nd Street Y, though he did, at the latter, 
read “Mood Indigo,” dedicated to me. 
When he said my name from the stage, 
Joan and Eileen, sitting to my left, turned 
and stared at me; frozen by the enormity 
of the moment, I couldn’t look back. 
When he came to a reading I gave at 
St. Mark’s, Raymond impressed upon 
me what an honor it was: Jimmy didn’t 
go to many poetry readings. What else 
is there to say? That when I visited him 
at St. Vincent’s the day before he died 
Darragh said, “He likes to hear gossip.” 
So I said, “Eileen and I are talking again.” 
That at his funeral I sat alone (Ira couldn’t 
come); that that was the loneliest feeling 
in the world. That afterwards Doug said 
“You look so sad.” How should I have 
looked, Doug! And that a year after he 
died, I dreamt I saw him in the lobby of 
the Chelsea Hotel. He was wearing a 
hospital shift and seemed to have no 
muscle control over his face—like in inten- 
sive care after his stroke. He saw me 
and said, “It’s nice to see some familiar 
faces.” I approached him, but he 
disappeared.




subjects : Friends & Enemies, Poetry & Poets, Relationships, Arts & Sciences