title : The Caveman on the Train

author : John Frederick Nims

text : 
When first the apprizing eye and tongue that muttered 
(Banished from Eden’s air? Or pride of apes?) 
Sat clinking flint on flint, as they shattered 
Snatched with a grin what fell in craftier shapes, 
The law was move or die. Lively from tigers; 
Dainty on deer. As weather called the tune. 
Oxen, we learned, would bear us. So would rivers. 
And that was science. On the whole a boon. 

What caveman on a round rock dumped a-grunting 
Rubbed at a rueful hip, brow darkening why? 
Or gaped at boulders over gravel shifting 
Until—a splendor of wheel-thought like sunrise! 
No wonder: such example in a heaven 
Revving immaculate gears, and at his feet 
The planet on her axle greased and even. 
Put any wheel to earth, and two wheels meet. 

Athens cut ruts of marble; ivory courses 
Caromed Apollo’s car of talkative gold.   
And Donne saw wagon-ways. The horsepower: horse 
Over the flats of Kansas sail-cars rolled.   
First planks on querulous ground, then treads of met 
Steel set edgewise, over stone for ties.   
A mountain? Sawtooth rail or crank-and-cable 
Till iron took serene the incredulous rise.   

Compleat with a nifty moniker, Puffing Billy,   
Best Friend of Charleston, Wabash Cannonball, 
Cycloped (horse on treadmill trudging), dapper 
Black and gold of Byzantium, Sans Pareil 
Flew in the face of time and testy weather, 
Enemies both, the lurid brakemen know.   
(By stoves where sand is baking crisp, they gather 
Trading the tall tales of high-striding snow.)   

The lone prairie, the twilight grey as steel, 
The vanishing freight—oh see the lonely road 
Our fathers wandered, stumbling on the wheel 
—Daydreamers all, and the long row unhoed— 
Sky-hankering men, their reverence still alive 
Some years ago: with burning glass and sun 
George Stephenson in 1825 
Snatched fire for Locomotion No. 1. 

Ten miles an hour, “immoderate” twelve. Today 
Slow Down to Ninety, warns the black ravine. 

He will go far, the caveman, this-a-way. 

By grand indifference to the red and green. 





subjects : Time & Brevity, Living, History & Politics, Social Commentaries