title : A Poet’s Death

author : David Trinidad

text : 
Rachel Sherwood 1954-1979  "What can you say about a twenty-five-year-old girl who died?" —Erich Segal, Love Story
The first time we talked was in the rooftop 
cafeteria at Cal State Northridge. 
Misplaced poets, we sat amidst a crop 
of clean-cut freshmen while, round the college, 
smog-smudged San Fernando Valley beckoned, 
panoramic and bland. I’d just returned 
from my debauched year up north—sad, drunken 
sex at the baths, in dark parks. You still yearned 
for St. David’s, your stint as a foreign 
exchange student. In Wales, something fearless 
woke you up: you drank, wrote, fucked. Now, stuck in 
the suburbs, we talked poets, punk rock. This 
was the late seventies, disco’s zenith. 
We both wanted to look like Patti Smith. 

We both wanted to look like Patti Smith 
on her Horses album: disheveled, pale, 
thin, intense. You were scanning Meredith’s 
“Modern Love” for British Lit. I thought stale 
anyone before Sexton. You laughed, threw 
back your head. I puffed a Marlboro Light. 
In truth, you were too hearty, and I too 
uptight, to do punk. I praised, as twilight 
dimmed the gray valley, a poem you’d read 
at the student reading: a pitcher cracks, 
foreshadows a car crash. The skyline bled 
behind you. I’d also read that night—racked 
with stage fright, trembling uncontrollably. 
You seemed at ease, more confident than me. 

You seemed at ease, more confident than me, 
more independent. Lived on Amigo 
Avenue with a roommate, a moody 
science major; and your alter ego, 
a tomcat named Baby Tubbs. Still at home, 
I had no wheels. You drove a battered white 
hatchback full of newspapers, beer cans, comb, 
brush, books—half wastebasket, half purse. One night 
early on, we split a fifth of scotch, spread 
your tarot cards on the living room floor. 
You predicted long life for me, then said 
of yourself: “I might make twenty-five.” Your 
roommate walked by, shot a look. Later, I 
passed out beneath Lord Byron’s watchful eye. 

Passed out beneath Lord Byron’s watchful eye— 
the poster tacked above your secondhand 
couch—I dreamt I was falling down the side 
of a mountain, a scarecrow, twisted and 
limp, limbs ripped, bouncing from rock to rock. On 
every wall an idol: Toulouse-Lautrec 
cancan in kitchen, young Chatterton’s wan 
figure over your desk. Shuffling the deck, 
you asked the same question, drew the same black 
card: Death. Together we consulted all 
your oracles: Ouija board, zodiac, 
I Ching, palm, a fickle Magic 8 Ball. 
Hoping for more time, you inquired, believed 
like a convict praying for a reprieve. 

Like a convict praying for a reprieve, 
you were more alive than the complacent 
suburbanites I despised. Drunk and peeved 
at the world, I started an argument 
that ended with you hurling a full Coors 
at me as I fumed down your stairs. Four weeks 
passed before we spoke, a rift I endured 
by writing a poem about the freak- 
ish night a black cloud followed us—we lit 
candles, toasted oblivion. Battle 
scarred, we entered the undergraduate 
poetry contest at Northridge. Daniel 
Halpern guest judged...or was it May Swenson? 
After your death, I’d be happy you won. 

What can you say about a twenty-five- 
year-old girl who died? That as a child she 
loved horses. And dogs. And cats. That Monty 
Python made her laugh. That she was alive 
to the disruptions of her time. That she 
liked Byron, Rod Stewart, Mozart, Waugh, Poe, 
Keats, the Cars. That she lived on Amigo 
and was my friend. That she once threw her keys 
in anger; once threw a New Yorker, shout- 
ing “I hate John Ashbery!” And that she 
once, after a speed- and scotch-fueled orgy— 
Some Girls blasting, her last boyfriend passed out 
beside us—straddled, rode me like a horse. 
Rachel, can I say this: your cunt felt coarse. 

After your death, I’d be happy you won 
the contest—at least you had that. “Don’t turn 
on me,” you pleaded. Losing wasn’t fun, 
but I couldn’t begrudge you your prize. Burned 
out from an abortion, a vicious bite— 
a German shepherd lunged at your nose, slit 
its tip—and a violent unrequit- 
ed affair with your “Don J,” a closet 
case obsessed with Kerouac, you spoke of 
making a change. By then it was summer: 
Blondie on the car radio, Fourth of 
July, craving fireworks. I remember 
headlights; reaching for the steering wheel, you. 
Next thing I knew, I woke in ICU.   

Next thing I knew, I woke in ICU: 
machines beeping around me, doctors and 
nurses hovering in an eerie blue 
light. Tube down my throat, I scrawled, with bruised hand, 
your name, question mark. My sister was steered 
in, wept to tell you were dead. The night they 
moved me to a private room, you appeared, 
pulsating white presence, in the hallway 
outside my door. “I’m all right,” you said, “You 
don’t have to worry about me.” I’d lie 
there in traction for six weeks, almost two 
decades ago, a ghost that fell from my 
own scarecrow dream, numb to that deadly drop. 
The first time we talked was on a rooftop.




subjects : Friends & Enemies, Living, Poetry & Poets, Relationships, Arts & Sciences, Sorrow & Grieving, Death