title : Congratulating Wedge

author : Alice Notley

text : 
All things belie me, I think, but I 
look at them though. Well boys, at 
least you’re not dead, right? What’s 
the date today? Until something. What? 
Of the lady of the whitening blow. 
I’m ashamed to keep on babbling 
as if I’ve always been oneself, 
diamond flow through. Humble 
flannel skeleton. Grin, laugh unbecoming 
Living at the bottom of the water may 
have been obvious all the time. But 
I forget. What’s my plot? Hand 
of a child, paw of an animal. Paint 
it red & make a pawprint in the psalter. 
Protect her & give her back her hat 
Entangle her dreams in demotic and 
Warm her feet; cheat the judge 
& protect the tree from which he was carved. 


                                  * 

And now that I’ve explained the situation 
Jesus my frame hurts, you say. 
Fucking pain. Hey come & empty my ashtray 
once more & don’t get so excited. A 
gentle heart was broken. Whose? No one’s 
It’s a figure like a frame among 
medlars & briars. Hand me that piece of 
that, just that, yeah. I don’t mean it, 
I’ve never meant anything because that’s 
not what I do, in the mountains I call home 
How can I tell you of my wound? it’s 
round & silver & headstrong, it’s 
nothing more than temperament born 
of a custom involving a circuitous journey 
This is all wrong. It rains today, my 
son’s singing love songs of this 
country, already being ten. 


                                  * 

And if to withstand this nocturnal pollution of the tiny 
wanton stars with bent hook clauses of misprision 
I’m supposed to sing the melody of an unexpecting part. . . 
Hey a pretty honey come a listen to me 
while I evening, darling, your messages, 
what would you think then? But I 
wouldn’t do that. Light surrounded oranges 
towels clouds. You don’t think you’re my you. 
Not here not you. You still think you’re he. she. 
Because I wouldn’t “you” you, would I? I only 
“you” some other he. she. I 
who write poems. When she writes them, 
it’s different. . .A world of words, right? 
It’s only my version of The Entertainer 
Nothing truly personal, I’m way above that. 
I’ve learned about it for a lot of days. I’ve 
been to see the doctor & you have to have shots 
for it. 17 balls of yarn & a sewing machine. 


                                  * 

No I wouldn’t know why anyone would 
want to write like that. I should never 
have had to do it. We were used to this 
other thing we always know like when we’re 
here. And you have this clear head & you’re 
seeing things & there they are. You don’t 
notice they’re spelled. That’s how you 
know you’re alive. I never saw you 






subjects : Living, Disappointment & Failure, Arts & Sciences, Poetry & Poets, Language & Linguistics