title : Chivalric

author : Bin Ramke

text : 
Heraldry and all its lovely language;   
I chose my time there learning 
elsewhere, where else than land,   
Landscape, and how to live, in it 
is not like, nothing is like, the colors 
or the snow, it is not like pearl and   
it is not like the glitter of rainwater 
that darkens the bark against which 
the occasional bloom-laden branch 
might be seen shedding petals. No. 
Here is the past: One was once a boy 
and read books and could not pronounce 
the most engaging words and read 
in silence under blankets. Here   
one was not like oneself or was 
quiet and wrong and did not know 
the words nor how to ask, who 
to ask. Nor why. Boy’s books with flags. 
Everyone’s born to the language; anyone 
can say something. For instance,   
knight banneret, that’s what she called him,   
having no use for him after history,   
she thrust him into the operatic night:   

                                        A woman’s hand rose 
above the surface of the lake and caught   
the glistering sword, and slowly   
descended into the boy’s refuge,   
his astonishment, so foreign, so little like home 
Knights Baronets—inferior barons formed 
by James I in 1611, the titles were sold 
and the funds went toward the plantation of Ulster. 
For this one would receive the right   
to a Field argent, a sinister hand 
couped the wrist gules. 


                                           How foreign she was   
when God still cared. This is like a life,   
like a history built fluently, as if 
on the innocent, Boy-books and children’s   
crusades: The Reading (al-Korân) 
versus The Writing (Scripture). 
Isn’t it interesting, east / west, us / them?   
Everyone’s born to something.    

                         You should have feared 
the flick of my uncle’s thick wrist and 
the boat rides when he took me in those days,   
salt water in the bay and hard slaps against the hull,   
back from a day of horizons, of shrimp nets,   
I would lie on the bow feeling anger against 
my whole boy’s body as the engines uttered   
their single syllable for twenty miles back to land,   
a whine more terrible than laughter. 

The oral tradition, a voice hard and horrifying. 
One might have been a chevalier. 
Like someone from the books, was she 
beautiful? Was your mother lovely   
and a kind of landscape herself, like snow 
in dark woods, not like anything else?  

Le plus que lent, my mother would say. 
She’d say, like Debussy 
she would say these things. Me 
and Mom in the kitchen: I should learn 
to waltz, it is a pretty thing to do 
at home, a thing the body does. 
The feet and blood. But mother   
doesn’t dance. I make up memories 
but who oh love, you used to   
dance; who’d kiss their hands?




subjects : Relationships, Family & Ancestors, Arts & Sciences, Language & Linguistics, Social Commentaries, History & Politics