title : Selected Recent and New Errors

author : Dean Young

text : 
My books are full of mistakes 
but not the ones Tony’s always pointing out 
as if correct spelling is what could stop the conveyor belt 
the new kid caught his arm in. 
Three weeks on the job and he’s already six hundred 
legal pages, lawyers haggling in an office 
with an ignored view of the river 
pretending to be asleep, pretending 
to have insight into its muddy self. 
You think that’s a fucked-up, drawn-out metaphor, 
try this: if you feel you’re writhing like a worm 
in a bottle of tequila, you don’t know 
it’s the quickness of its death that reveals 
the quality of the product, its proof. 
I don’t know what I’m talking about either. 
Do you think the dictionary ever says to itself 
I’ve got these words that mean completely 
different things inside myself 
and it’s tearing me apart? 
My errors are even bigger than that. 
You start taking down the walls of your house, 
sooner or later it’ll collapse 
but not before you can walk around 
with your eyes closed, rolled backwards 
and staring straight into the amygdala’s meatlocker 
and your own damn self hanging there. 
Do that for awhile and it’s easier to delight   
in snow that lasts about twenty minutes 
longer than a life held together 
by the twisted silver baling wire 
of deception and stealth. 
But I ain’t confessing nothing. 
On mornings when I hope you forget my name, 
I walk through the high wet weeds 
that don’t have names either. 
I do not remember the word dew. 
I do not remember what I told you 
with your ear in my teeth. 
Further and further into the weeds. 
We have absolutely no proof 
god isn’t an insect 
rubbing her hind legs together to sing. 
Or boring into us like a yellow jacket 
into a fallen, overripe pear. 
Or an assassin bug squatting over us, 
shoving a proboscis right through 
our breast plate then sipping. 
How wonderful our poisons don’t kill her.




subjects : Arts & Sciences, Reading & Books, Poetry & Poets, Humor & Satire