title : Marble-Sized Song

author : Albert Goldbarth

text : 
Does she love you? She says yes, but really 
how do you know unless you undress that easy assertion, 
undoing its petals and laminae, and going in 
below all trace of consciousness, into the neuroelectrical 
coffer where self-understanding is storaged away, 
and then lifting its uttermost molecule out, to study 
in its nakedness as it spins 
in a clinical light?—the way 
we all, in our various individual versions 
of this common human urge, go in, 
and in, and in, the physicist down 
to the string-vibration underlying matter, and   
the Appalachia fiddler getting so 
(as she puts it) “into my music,” sound becomes 
a flesh for her to intimately (“in”-timately) 
enter, “its thick and its sweetbreads.”
Is he cheating on you? He says no, and feigns 
that he’s insulted, but for certainty 
you’ll need to delicately strip the bark away 
and drill, and tweeze, until you can smear a microscope slide 
of the pith and can augur the chitterlings 
—the way the philosopher can’t accept a surface 
assumption of truth, but needs to peel back   
the fatty sheen of the dermis, soak the cambium layer 
into a blow-away foam, and then with pick 
and lightbeam helmet, inch by inch begin 
spelunking through those splayed-out caverns 
under the crust, where gems of cogitation are buried 
—the way the diver descends for the pearl, 
the miner: in, the archaeologist: in, the therapist: down 
the snakier roots of us and in, and in, the way 
the lone, leg-pretzeled yogi makes 
a glowing bathysphere of worldliness and sends it in, 
and further in, tinier and heavier and ever in, 
the way the man in the opium den is floating forever, 
toward a horizon positioned in the center of the center 
of his head. . . . If we could stand beyond the border 
of our species and consider us objectively, it might seem 
that our purpose in existing is to be a living agency 
that balances, or maybe even slows, the universe’s 
irreversible expansion out, and out . . . and each 
of us, a contribution to that task. 
My friend John’s wife received the news: a “growth,” 
a “mass,” on her pituitary, marble-sized, mysterious. 
And the primary-care physician said: Yes, 
we must go in and in. That couldn’t be the final word! 
And the second-opinion physician said: Yes, 
my sweet-and-shivering-one, 
my fingerprint-and-irisprint-uniqueness, 
someone’s-dearest, you 
who said the prayers at Juliette’s grave, who drove 
all night from Switzerland with your daughter, you 
on this irreplaceable day in your irreplaceable skin 
in the scumbled light as it crosses the bay in Corpus Christi, 
yes in the shadows, yes in the radiance, 
yes we must go in and in.




subjects : Living, Health & Illness, Relationships, Men & Women