title : At a VA Hospital in the Middle of the United States of America: An Act in a Play

author : Etheridge Knight

text : 
Stars from five wars, scars, 
Words filled with ice and fear, 
Nightflares and fogginess, 
and a studied regularity. 
      Gon’ lay down my sword ’n’ shield— 
      Down by the river side, down by the river side— 
      Down by the river side... 

Former Sergeant Crothers, among the worst, 
Fought the first. He hears well, tho 
He mumbles in his oatmeal. He 
Was gassed outside Nice. We 
Tease him about “le pom-pom,” and chant: 
“There’s a place in France where the women wear no pants.” 
Former Sergeant Crothers has gray whiskers 
And a gracious grin, 
But his eyes do not belie 
His chemical high. 
      Gon’ lay down my sword ’n’ shield— 
      Down by the river side, down by the river side— 
      Down by the river side... 

A.C. Williams drove a half-track 
“Half da goddamn way ’cross Africa 
In da second war,” his black 
Face proclaims, and exclaims— 
Along with other rosy exaggerations. 
Each week he sneaks through the iron-wrought fence 
To the Blinking Bar down the street. 
Midnight reeks the red-eyes, the tired 
Temper, the pains in the head. 
A phone call summons an aide to bring A. C. to bed. 
      Ain’t gon’ study the war no more... Well, 
      I ain’t gonna study the war no more— 
      Ain’t gonna study the war no more— 
      O I ain’t gonna study the war no more. 

“Doc” Kramer, ex-medic in Korea 
Is armless. And legless, 
is an amazement of machines 
And bubbling bottles. His nurse, 
White starched and erect, beams 
A calloused cheerfulness: 
“How are we today?” Kramer’s wife leans 
Forward, sparkling fingers caressing his stump 
Of arm. She is pink, fifty-six, and plump. 
“Doc” Kramer desires sleep. 
      Gon’ lay down my sword ’n’ shield— 
      Down by the river side, down by the river side— 
      Down by the river side... 

Ex PFC Leonard Davenport goes to court 
Tomorrow. He is accused of “possession and sale” 
Of narcotics; his conditional bail 
Was that he stay at the VA, for the cure. 
For an end to sin, 
For a surcease of sorrow. 
He spends his pension for ten grams of “pure.” 
He nods the days away, 
And curses his Ranger Colonel in fluent Vietnamese. 
His tour in “Nam” is his golden prize. 
      Gon’ lay down my sword ’n’ shield— 
      Down by the river side, down by the river side— 
      Down by the river side... 

Grant Trotter’s war was the south side 
Of San Diego. Storming the pastel sheets 
Of Mama Maria’s, he got hit with a fifty 
Dollar dose of syphilis. His feats 
Are legends of masturbation, the constant coming 
As he wanders the back streets of his mind. 
The doctors whisper and huddle in fours 
When Trotter’s howls roam the corridors. 
We listen. We are patient patients. 
      Ain’t gon’ study the war no more... Well, 
      I ain’t gonna study the war no more— 
      Ain’t gonna study the war no more— 
      O I ain’t gonna study the war no more.




subjects : War & Conflict, Social Commentaries