title : The King of Asini

author : George Seferis

text : 
’Ασíνην τε. . . — Iliad
All morning long we looked around the citadel 
starting from the shaded side there where the sea 
green and without lustre — breast of a slain peacock — 
received us like time without an opening in it. 
Veins of rock dropped down from high above, 
twisted vines, naked, many-branched, coming alive 
at the water’s touch, while the eye following them 
struggled to escape the monotonous see-saw motion, 
growing weaker and weaker. 

On the sunny side a long empty beach 
and the light striking diamonds on the huge walls. 
No living thing, the wild doves gone 
and the king of Asini, whom we’ve been trying to find for two years now, 
unknown, forgotten by all, even by Homer, 
only one word in the Iliad and that uncertain, 
thrown here like the gold burial mask. 
You touched it, remember its sound? Hollow in the light 
like a dry jar in dug earth: 
the same sound that our oars make in the sea. 
The king of Asini a void under the mask 
everywhere with us everywhere with us, under a name: 
‘’Ασíνην τε. . .’Ασíνην τε. . .’ 
                                          and his children statues 
and his desires the fluttering of birds, and the wind 
in the gaps between his thoughts, and his ships 
anchored in a vanished port: 
under the mask a void. 

Behind the large eyes the curved lips the curls 
carved in relief on the gold cover of our existence 
a dark spot that you see travelling like a fish 
in the dawn calm of the sea: 
a void everywhere with us. 
And the bird, a wing broken, 
that flew away last winter 
— tabernacle of life — 
and the young woman who left to play 
with the dog-teeth of summer 
and the soul that sought the lower world gibbering 
and the country like a large plane-leaf swept along by the torrent of the sun 
with the ancient monuments and the contemporary sorrow. 

And the poet lingers, looking at the stones, and asks himself 
does there really exist 
among these ruined lines, edges, points, hollows and curves 
does there really exist 
here where one meets the path of rain, wind and ruin 
does there exist the movement of the face, shape of the tenderness 
of those who’ve waned so strangely in our lives, 
those who remained the shadow of waves and thoughts with the sea’s boundlessness 
or perhaps no, nothing is left but the weight 
the nostalgia for the weight of a living existence 
there where we now remain unsubstantial, bending 
like the branches of a terrible willow tree heaped in unremitting despair 
while the yellow current slowly carries down rushes uprooted in the mud 
image of a form that the sentence to everlasting bitterness has turned to stone: 
the poet a void. 

Shieldbearer, the sun climbed warring, 
and from the depths of the cave a startled bat 
hit the light as an arrow hits a shield: 
‘’Ασíνην τε. . .’Ασíνην τε. . .’. If only that could be the king of Asini 
we’ve been searching for so carefully on this acropolis 
sometimes touching with our fingers his touch upon the stones. 


                                                      Asini, summer ’38—Athens, Jan. ’40




subjects : Death, Relationships, Time & Brevity, Heroes & Patriotism, Living, Mythology & Folklore