title : Charles Meryon

author : Christopher Middleton

text : 
1 
Meryon saw it coming (who was he?): 
No people, so no noise. As it should be. 
The Bridge. The Morgue. Ghostly round his bed 
Antipodean atolls and tattoos had fluted, 

Volcanoes puffed. Then borborygmic sea 
Forked, at its last gasp, into a V: 
Down that black gallery and backward slid 
A syrup, foul, ovum and sperm concocted, 
The foggy groan of Antichrist. 1863: 
People mattered nothing, live or dead. 

Paris by his impeccable etchings emptied: 
Pointy turrets, windows, not a single head 
Poking out—and there across the sky, 
Tortuous, the skeleton birds creak by. 

2 
As if all the steps had stopped 
As if all the takes had token 
As if all the creaks had croaken 
As if all that weeps had wopped 

As if all that flips had flopped 
As if all that mocks had moaken 
As if all that speaks had spoken 
As if all that drips had dropped 

As if all that hopes had hopped 
As if all that leaps had lopped 
As if all that aches had oaken 
As if all that peaks had poken 
As if all that creeps had cropped 
As if all that peeps had popped 

3 
The old aquaforte art is back, thought Baudelaire. 
Multiple majesty of stone piled on stone; 
Obelisks of industry discharge into the air 
Their coalescent smoke. Almost airborne 
Scaffoldings roped to monuments under repair— 
Very poetic, beauty so paradoxical 
I never saw the like; 

                        and the sky over it all— 
Eagles. Tumult. Perspective deepens there 
With all the dramas that have come and gone. 

The artist: Once a sailor, now he’ll seek 
In nooks of masonry a sphinx. 

                            I think you’d get a scare 
To hear him talk: “Poe did not exist, aha! 
Poe was a syndicate!” 

                            To Madame Aupick: 
Au fait tu as peut-être oublié tous ça. 

4 
How should people promenade on maps? 
My map—I image what goes up, like steeple... 
On map there is no space, no time, for people... 
With window slot I thicken this façade, perhaps? 

I map the time. These arches, tenements— 
Voice the design of fate, exact. Why folks? 
They are confusion. Burin cannot coax 
Their hollow little solids to make sense. 

The earth, a globe. On it Paree, immense 
Phantom, or ulcer. So I map excrescence. 
I probe its twisted fibres till I find 
The core of its cabala, in my mind. 

Ah, you are being faraway too kind. 
Dark, beautiful cabala! 
                              Goodbye, gentlemens.




subjects : Painting & Sculpture, Arts & Sciences, Cities & Urban Life, Social Commentaries