title : Other Fugitives and Other Strangers

author : Rigoberto González

text : 
The nightclub’s neon light glows red with anxiety 
as I wait on the turning lane. Cars blur past, 
their headlights white as charcoal. 
I trust each driver not to swerve. I trust each stranger 
not to kill me and let me cross 
the shadow of his smoky path. 
Trust is all I have for patrons at the bar: 
one man offers me a line, one man buys the kamikaze, 
another drinks it. Yet another wraps his arm 
around my waist. I trust him not to harm my body 
as much as he expects his body to remain unharmed. 
One man asks me to the dance floor, one asks me 
to a second drink, another asks me home. 
I dance, I drink, I follow. 
I can trust a man without clothes. 
Naked he conceals no weapons, no threat 
but the blood in his erection. His bed unfamiliar, 
only temporarily. Pillows without loyalty 
absorb the weight of any man, betray 
the scent of the men who came before. 
I trust a stranger’s tongue to tell me 
nothing valuable. It makes no promises 
of truth or lies, it doesn’t swear commitments. 
The stranger’s hands take their time exploring. 
Undisguised, they do not turn to claws or pretend 
artistic skill to draw configurations on my flesh. They 
are only human hands with fingertips 
unsentimental with discoveries, without nostalgia 
for what they leave behind. I trust this stranger 
not to stay inside me once he enters me. 
I trust him to release me from the blame 
of pleasure. The pain I exit with no greater 
than the loneliness that takes me to the bar. 
He says good night, I give him back 
those words, taking nothing with me that is his. 
The front door shuts behind me, the gravel 
driveway ushers me away. The rearview mirror 
loses sight of threshold, house, sidewalk, street. 
Driving by the nightclub I pass a car 
impatient on the turning lane. My hands are cold 
and itch to swerve the wheel, to brand 
his fender with the fury of my headlights. 
But I let this stranger live 
to struggle through the heat and sweat 
of false affections, anonymous and 
borrowed like the glass that washed my prints 
to hold another patron’s drink.




subjects : Relationships, Love, Social Commentaries, Desire