title : “The Secretary of Liquor”

author : Mark Rudman

text : 
 
(JOHN F. KENNEDY’S INFORMAL APPOINTMENT OF DEAN MARTIN TO HIS CABINET) 
 

    
            What the fuck did they want, these men who needed the 
            company of others to make a life, as he needed a woman 
            to make babies? 
                                    —Dino, nick tosches 

                            I always plays to de common folk. 
                                        —dean martin 


                                                      1 

It was casting time for The Young Lions. 
Brando wouldn’t hesitate given this chance to dye 
his hair white and do a German 

accent. And while no one would hire Monty Clift 
after his facially disfiguring car-wreck, 
Brando convinced the studio that the other, slightly 

older, kid from Omaha was the right man. 
No one could play a more sensitive-tough than Monty, 
like the artist-bugler-boxer Prewitt 

mistaken for the enemy, gunned down 
by his own men in the Pearl Harbor dawn; 
or the way, as the seraphic cowboy Matt Dunson, 

he got a rise out of his demented empire builder 
father, John Wayne, by kicking over a tin cup, 
sloshing the coffee into the dust to show his disgust. 

Clift knew that Lions director Edward Dmytryk 
was searching for someone to play a key 
supporting role—as Frank Sinatra had in From Here To 

Eternity—yet he was stunned to hear it was 
“Jerry Lewis’s partner in shlock.” 
Clift softened, nauseated when he saw 

Martin’s competition 
pander to the crowd on Broadway. 
Lucky for Monty that he let it go: the two men 

not only became friends; it was Dean 
who put the man with the wired-jaw to bed 
when he had the chloral hydrate and alcohol wobblies. 

Ignorant of Brando’s intervention on his behalf, 
Monty told Dean that Marlon’s fifty takes per scene 
were getting on his nerves more and more 

and he vowed to walk off the set if he tried 
ONE MORE TIME to have his German soldier die 
with arms spread wide to “echo the crucifixion.” 

Clift, wasted with self-recrimination at forty-five. 
Martin, an actor for whom one run through a scene 
almost always sufficed. 

Dean got a chuckle out of Monty with his response. 
“It should be awful good with so many takes.” 
Then the future flashed before him. 

“I guess there are directors who want us to do 
the same scene over and over again too.” 
“Sure, lots. Some of the best.” 

“I guess I got spoiled. Jerry and I got 
to where we pretty much called the shots.” 
And then—without any foreknowledge 

that he’d be doing his only two other 
serious roles in the next two years 
and be subject to directorial rule on the sets of 

Some Came Running and Rio Bravo— 
he vowed in the future to set up his golf net 
before shooting started on a picture. 

Dean appeared to float, perfection 
never an aspiration: that he was already as well known 
for his insouciance and drunk persona as for 

his singing and acting doesn’t mean he was so well-defended 
that he didn’t feel any pressure about working 
with such aces as Brando and Clift. 

He didn’t have to stretch to play a would-be draft dodger, 
Michael Whiteacre: “a likeable coward like myself,” 
a screenwriter in Shaw’s novel, a singer in the movie. 

The army doctor feeds Dean his first line in Lions 
as if his future were visible in the instant: 
art and life exquisitely commingled. 

Doctor: “For a man your age and in your profession 
you’re in excellent health. How do you manage it?” 
Martin doesn’t hesitate: “Clean liquor.” 

But sauntering through this role didn’t mean 
everything was swell: he felt so out-of-place 
on location in France he gave up the offer of 

a choice part in The Guns of Navarone 
because it meant going back to Europe. 
In his middle years, he ambled through the role 

of “Matt Helm” in another toneless 
Bondian takeoff, and when Columbia 
wanted to shoot Murderers’ Row 

on location in Cannes, Dino 
set the studio straight: “fuck no, 
just build some fake Riviera sets.” 


                                                      2 

A diffident crooner, he needed a stooge. 
License to fuck around on stage. 
After his split with Jerry, Dino’s drunk persona grew 

into a ghostly partner, and by the time he had his own TV show 
the public was so saturated with his presence, 
many conflated the persona and the person. 

When he landed the drunk’s key role in Rio Bravo, 
he turned to Brando for help, “what should I do?” 
Brando told him what to think about. 

The more inscrutable the subject 
the more this spectre stands out in relief. 
Part of Martin’s appeal was that no one knew him. 

It wasn’t a mask; his detachment was who he was. 
He showed up, his spirit remained elsewhere. 
His wives and children found him unknowable. 

It wasn’t personal. When the Martins entertained, 
the guests carried on while Dino disappeared 
into his room to watch westerns on TV, alone. 

It wasn’t personal. When the producer of 
“The Colgate Comedy Hour” suggested they have lunch 
to get to know one another, Dino 

set him straight: “No one gets to know me.” 
Martin was a man no one came close to knowing. 
What does it mean, to know someone? 


                                                      3 

Why ask such questions at all after Socrates 
beguiled us out of answers and set us on 
the inexhaustible path...dialectics? 

Don’t you think I haven’t wondered if I haven’t 
strayed from my true path as I find myself 
tracking the trajectory of such non-exemplary lives? 

You’re thinking it’s a trick, and will not answer, 
but before you judge my dissolute subject— 
who like the money but thought all the attention 

was a joke because “a singer is nothing”— 
as a derelict choice, consider how philosophy, 
while striving to become more concrete 

continues to recoil before the problem of other minds. 
And it is said that Monsieur Sartre turned paler 
than his martini, when Raymond Aron 

challenged the Husserlians, at the Bec de Gaz 
in Montparnasse, to make philosophy 
out of a cocktail glass. 


                                                      4 

There’s something about everyone no one can know. 
There was no question of Dino taking orders 
and being bossed around was out of bounds: 

penalty shot incurred for the perpetrator, 
who was, this time, the imperious Billy Wilder 
whose streak of hits was breaking fast. 

Dino as always was doing his job, 
which was to literally play himself in Kiss Me, 
Stupid, and Billy had the balls 

to cap an interview at the Hollywood Press Club 
with this tactless pearl: “stars don’t mean a thing.” 
Was this because of what Stupid might have been 

had Marilyn, whose presence he had counted on, 
not done herself in? Was Wilder gambling 
that fellow exiles from the Reich, 

Lang, von Stroheim, and even the ghosts 
of Lubitsch, Brecht and Thomas Mann 
would have been there to applaud and acknowledge 

that he, from a younger generation of German exiles, 
was one of them? 
Dino didn’t brood. Dino didn’t blow. 

There would be no humiliating histrionics. 
He would put Wilder in his place 
with a letter, denouncing him as an arrogant 

and self-important son-of-a-bitch. 
Without angling for the director’s respect, 
he got it, and more. 

After six weeks of delectable footage 
with Peter Sellers—whose American debut 
was to have been in Stupid— 

as the small town piano teacher 
intent on writing a hit song 
and enlisting Dino to “get it in the right hands” 

the tetchy “thirty-nine year old actor had a massive 
coronary,” yet not long after landing in Heathrow 
found the breath to bitch to the press 

about crowds on the set, wrote a letter 
vilifying Wilder and Hollywood, 
and swore never to return. 

Wilder was used to being the abuser, not the abused. 
He had to take it out on someone and no one better 
to park at than Sellers’ replacement, 

Ray Walston, as they reshot scenes. 
Ray was cowed.   Dino knew it. 
Ray observed that Dino was never without a glass 

in hand but assumed (wrongly) that it was filled 
with ginger ale instead of vodka. 
Which Dino was this, the persona or the person? 

Dino advised Ray, IN A VOICE LOUD ENOUGH 
SO THAT EVERYONE ONE THE SET COULD HEAR 
to “tell that cocksucker to go fuck himself and do it your own way.” 

Wilder went wild. Martin practice putting. 
“If you wanted an actor, what the fuck did you get me for. 
Why didn’t you get fucking Marlon Brando.” 

It was as if Dino, who’d boxed in his youth 
under the pseudonym “Kid Crochet,” 
had sucker-punched the dictator, who found himself 

disarmed by this unflappable and far from ugly, 
American. Dino’s aplomb had Wilder 
on the floor, howling with laughter, just as night- 

club audiences used to crack up 
out of sheer anticipation of the antics to come 
while waiting for Martin and Lewis 

to begin their act...which knew no limits. 
They didn’t break rules, they made them up 
as they went along, as when they leapt from the stage 

followed by floodlights in Fort Lee, New Jersey, 
to chase a slender tall brunette in a white dress 
down the aisle, chanting, in imitation moron— 

“we know where you’re going, we know where you’re going”— 
because she had the nerve to leave her seat 
before they’d finished their act. 

She was mortified, but not for long. 
They had no way of knowing that a young 
woman who was that well put together 

could be as painfully self-conscious 
as this anonymous girl, who within a few 
years would become my mother. 


                                                      5 

There is something beautiful and horrible 
about Dino’s incarnation of cool. 
Anger sublimated into a mask 

that would not harden, could not crack. 
Dino did not end in ruin, like the others. 
His falling away was gradual. 

His lifelong withdrawal, prelude to silence. 
Henry Miller had finally gotten Tropic of Cancer 
through the courts. He’d spent his life 

in quest of freer spirits than his own, 
and now, after Rimbaud and Lawrence 
and The Colossus of Maroussi, 

he found in Martin a priest of irreverence 
who was beyond nihilism, 
who shrugged off everything the doom culture 

deemed valuable, and pulled strings to be 
granted an audience with the man 
who made heavy weather of nothing. 


                                                      6 

Driving home to the suburbs during rush hour 
in the huge gas-guzzling cars that signified 
America’s boom economy in the 1960’s, 

married men without time sighed for the first 
time all day when “Houston” came on the a.m. 
Then, back in their gaudy palaces at last, 

they stacked Martin’s LP’s 
on the turntable while mixing martinis. 
Was it the façade that never cracked, never changed guises? 

And isn’t facade precisely the wrong term for one man’s 
unchanging way of being in the world? 
Dean would say that’s it’s a waste to waste this wasted 

unasked for sojourn on earth thinking about shit 
like what others think of us, or depressing shit, 
like “the fucking Cold War or Vietnam,” 

or rip-off artists like the Beatles 
(“why do they spell it with an ‘a’?”). 
Jealous? Never. Only annoyed that they kept bugging him 

with questions. Why did he have to think? 
Wasn’t it enough just to live? Dino didn’t work 
to see his voice or image reproduced; 

he acted, sang, and hosted shows, on screen 
and in person, because it was easier than real 
work. 

Dino liked his inflated wages, but money 
meant nothing beyond what it could buy. 
“A singer is nothing.” Why did he sing? 

It was the easiest way to make a bundle. 
When anyone complained that acting was hard word 
Dino responded as Crocetti, the barber’s son 

from Steubenville: “You think acting’s work? 
Try standing on your feet 
twelve hours a day dealing Blackjack.” 


                                                      7 

If you agree that Dino lived to live on his own terms, 
and if his triumphs were in the significant films 
where he had allowed himself to take 

direction, listen, learn, tremble and transcend, 
then his second greatest trope 
after inventing himself 

was convincing producers and directors 
to let him play a character 
who sang and drank and thought about golf more than god, 

so that the actor and the part were entirely one. 
His string of walk-through roles 
was like a continuous aside 

to his audience, dissolving the boundary 
between actor and spectator 
and giving birth to a suspect and shadowy intimacy.




subjects : Social Commentaries, Popular Culture