title : Slave Sale: New Orleans

author : Charles Reznikoff

text : 
To begin with, the slaves had to wash themselves well, 
and the men who had beards had to shave them off; 
the men were then given a new suit each, 
cheap but clean, and a hat, shirt, and shoes; 
and the women were each given a frock of calico 
and a handkerchief to tie about their heads. 
They were then led by the man selling them into a large room; 
the men placed on one side, the women at the other; 
the tallest at the head of each row 
and then the next in size 
and so on to the shortest. 

Many called to look at the slaves for sale 
and the seller kept talking about their qualities; 
made them hold up their heads and walk about briskly; 
and those who might buy had them open their mouths 
to look at their teeth, 
and felt their arms and bodies, 
just as they might a horse for sale; 
and asked each what they could do. 
Sometimes a man or woman would be taken to a small house 
    in the yard, 
to be stripped and looked at carefully: 
if they had the scars of whips on their backs 
that would show they had been troublesome. 

During the day a number of sales were made; 
and a planter from Baton Rouge bought Eliza’s little son. 
Before that the boy had to jump and run across the floor 
to show his activity. 
But all the time the trade was going on,   
his mother was crying and wringing her hands 
and kept begging the man who was thinking of buying the boy 
not to buy him unless he bought her, too, 
and her little daughter: 
and Eliza kept saying that if he did she would be “the most 
    faithful slave that ever lived.” 
But the man from Baton Rouge said he could not afford to 
    buy her, 
and then she began to cry aloud in her grief. 

The man selling the slaves turned on her, his whip lifted, 
and told her to stop her noise: 
if she would not stop her “sniveling” 
he would take her into the yard 
and give her a hundred lashes. 
She tried to wipe away her tears 
but could not 
and said she wanted to be with her children 
and kept begging the man selling the slaves and the man from   
    Baton Rouge— 
who by that time had bought her son— 
not to separate the three of them, mother, son, and daughter; 
and over and over again kept saying how faithful and obedient 
    she would be 
and how hard she would work day and night. 

But the man from Baton Rouge 
said again he could not buy mother and son, let alone the three, 
and that only the boy must go with him. 
Then Eliza ran to her son, hugged him and kissed him 
again and again 
and her tears kept falling on his face. 
The man selling the slaves kept cursing her 
and called her a blubbering, howling wench 
and ordered her back to her place in line 
and to behave herself 
or he would give her something really to cry about.




subjects : History & Politics, Social Commentaries, Race & Ethnicity