title : What is this about losing respect?

author : Mark Rudman

text : 
What is this about losing respect? 

Do I have to talk about it? 
He said he feared what I might 
write about him when he was gone, 
and I told him not to worry. 

He worried about the “streak of morbidity” in your work. 

He was a man of God, not of imagination. 

And it wasn’t his fault if he got the shakes. 
It was a familial tremor, not nerves. 

And it first happened at a gravesite. 

Near where Brigham Young did his number—“this is the place.” 

He called him Friggin Young. 

Well, during his bleak tenure in Greenville, 
his congregants would tell nigger jokes 
and he would force a smile—afraid now to rock the boat— 
a mere exercise in stretching 
                the corners of his lips— 
a fake grin he would have noted 
on another face—false faces being 
            one of the things we loved 
to laugh about when together we observed congregants’ idiosyncracies, 
their ruses, their guises, 

like one temple president, the son 
         of the “richest Jew in Salt Lake” 
who, seated in the pulpit’s other red velvet wing chair, 
         would expose the holes in the soles of his shoes 
while he batted his eyelashes to 
         wake himself up— 

(though I owe him one: “Rosencavalier” 
didn’t turn me in for copying 
         the wrong answers from Mary Weinstein 
on our “final exam” in Sunday 
         school prior to       confirmation. 

He was ashamed for me, 
                                          young Rosencavalier. 

He could hardly disguise 
         the curled lips and downcast eyes 
         of his contempt 
         for this lawless “Rabbi’s son” 
         whether or not my name 
         was Strome or Rudman, 

but where teaching Judaism was concerned 
         his plodding methodical 
reading to keep up each week 
         was a pathetic substitution 
for Sidney’s well-wrought, impromptu riffs. 

                                              So there!) 

Marty was ashamed of me. 
I left town. 

As night was falling? 


                                             * 

In Utah you can drive at fifteen so by age 
fourteen a lot of our talk 
was hard core car talk 

and somehow the word 
Volkswagen came up 
after confirmation class 

(it was no GTO but you could drive 
so far on so little gas...) 
and Marty’s father—a redhead like his son— 

made his way up the driveway’s ice, 
smoke billowing from the exhaust 
of whatever sleek black foreign car he drove. 

Pulling on his elegant pigskin gloves 
he announced he’d “never buy a Kraut    car.” 
I was    bewildered 

(what, hold against a country now 
something that happened so long    ago?) 
and he held my gaze 

and I shivered inside the shiver I felt 
from the cold    I thought he would 
transmogrify into a southern sheriff 

and ask “what kind of    Jew are you    boy” 
but he didn’t have to say 
another word. 


                                             * 

In other words you were ready to leave town. 

I’d had it with Utah. 

But you wanted to stay in the west, against your father’s wishes?  

Yes. 

Unequivocally? 

Yes. Yes. Yes. 

But you did submit to psychiatrists and interviews with the heads of schools 
during your sojourn in the east that summer? 

Yes. I didn’t say I wasn’t ambivalent and/or confused. 

Nothing more, your honor. 


                                             * 

This was around the time, was it not, that a certain “Penny,” from Los 
Angeles, a family friend of your grandfather’s, came to dinner in Salt Lake 
City... 

She was a small woman, slightly hunchbacked, who spoke in a low 
voice. She was one of my mother’s major confidantes. My mother had a 
great respect for her because she was the buyer for I. Magnin’s. When 
the subject of my father came up, as it always did, Penny, fueled by 
several Scotches, seemed to retract her head into her chest and when it 
reemerged she spat out this sentence about Charles: “Why he’d stick his 
prick into anything!” 

I blanched. My features stiffened with rage.   Sensual and tormented man 
that he was, whatever he was, what right did they have to tear him down 
in front of me! She put her leathered multi-braceleted hand on my hand 
and said, “It’s all right, dahlink.” I said, “I’ve never seen him do any- 
thing like that.” And they continued. “Well he used to screw the maid,” 
my mother threw in wearily. 

How did they know so much about him, this shadow, this spectre? 

Everyone knew. 

There she was, this tiny hunchback, almost a dwarf—this was how she 
conceived of loyalty to my mother. In reality, it was another patronizing 
blow, as if my mother had to hear the worst in order not to feel that the 
failure of the marriage might have been her failure. 

And while they sat there tearing him down the phone rang and it was— 
guess who. Your mother handed the phone over to Sidney who, geared for 
battle, bourbon happy, quarreled with your father about the precise details 
as to where you should go when you “left town.” They had come to an 
impasse in the conversation when it seems your father said something like 
“you can’t talk to Charles K. Rudman that way” and Sidney said—because 
this you overheard—“what does the ‘K’ stand for”—and your father said— 
according to Sidney—“cocksucker.” 

And Sidney howled. He would rag him till the end of his days. “Is this 
Charles K. Rudman?” 

I didn’t call you a cocksucker, Sidney said, 
 
but since you said it i 
heard you were a cocksucker. 

 
I didn’t say it! 

"I am,” your father was rumored to have said, probably (possibly?) not 
meaning it literally, but more within the vernacular of street language, 
curse-words meaning “sonofabitch,” not someone who literally “sucked 
cocks.” 

I think so. 

Your heart went out to your poor father at that moment, didn’t it? Sidney 
had a way of miscalculating the effect of these shots on you. You knew your 
father was writhing in an agony of frustration. 

Yes. 

But Sidney was running with it, relishing Charles’ self-hatred, his masoch 
-ism which erupted at that moment out of frustration...And for years he 
loved to tell the story of how Charles “called himself a cocksucker,” always 
underscoring the anecdote by absolving himself, by making it clear that it 
wasn’t he who first used the word. 

He really rubbed it in. 

Can you forgive him? 


                                             * 

Only now that he’s dead can I let myself feel 
how good we were at leaving each other alone.




subjects : Family & Ancestors, Relationships, Living, Sorrow & Grieving