title : The Strangers Who Find Me in the Woods

author : Rigoberto González

text : 
after Thomas James
The strangers in the woods must mimic squirrels and crackle 
with the undergrowth. They must not flinch at the cruelty 
of breaking golden leaves with their feet, or of interring stones. 
And like any of these deciduous trees in autumn they must be 

stingy with shadow and move deceptively across the sludge. 
I listen to these strangers stirring with the evenings. I invent paths 
for them to the soft edge of the lake. Each descent is as graceful 
as a sinking ship, but less tragic somehow because these strangers 

don’t possess a lung. I cannot hear them breathe, yet the air 
is all whispers, all sighs—the same ethereal muscle that rubs 
the color off the foliage. I lost my way out of the woods on the night 
every bird went south or numb. A plump rat snatched the moon 

and dragged it by the white rope of its tail. The strangers were 
a cloak of silhouettes flattening against a trunk like bark. 
I must have disappeared among them because the mouth I touched 
was not my own and was cruelly closing in on someone’s rib. I carried 

such a bite on me, an arc of green and yellow on my side from the man 
who said he loved me. In that darkness I knew as much about him 
as I did of the amputee swimming his way up the hill with his 
only arm. So this is the home of the unturned stone where 

the fugitive keeps his kiss! Archeologists will discover a paradise 
in the place no touch died of neglect. Is it any wonder all things 
forgotten or abandoned find their way here? The winter is back, so too 
the bloated body of a book I tossed over the bridge last week. 

And there on the bench, is my old smoking habit, a cigarette 
glowing on my mouth like a beacon. I’m patient, waiting for the fugitive 
to claim me as his own. I’m as wise as any stranger here, alone but with 
the knowledge that the grief of separation is always brief.




subjects : Relationships, Love, Nature, Trees & Flowers, The Body, Social Commentaries, Desire