title : Rivers into Seas

author : Lynda Hull

text : 
For Wally Roberts, 1951-1994
Palaces of drift and crystal, the clouds 
loosen their burden, unworldly flakes so thick 
the border zones of sea and shore, the boundless zones 
of air fuse to float their worlds until the spirits   
congregate, fleet histories yearning into shape. 

Close my eyes and I’m a vessel. Make it 
some lucent amphora, Venetian blue, lip circled 
in faded gold. Can you see the whorls of breath, 
imperfections, the navel where it was blown 
from the maker’s pipe, can you see it drawn 

up from the bay where flakes hiss the instant 
they become the bay? Part the curtain. The foghorn’s 
steady, soothing moan—warning, safety, the reeling 
home. Shipwreck and rescue. Stories within stories— 
there’s this one of the cottage nestled into dune 

snowed into pure wave, the bay beyond and its lavish 
rustle, skirts lifting and falling fringed in foam.   
But I’m in another season—my friends’ house adrift,   
Wally’s last spring-into-summer, his bed a raft, 
cats and dogs clustered and we’re watching television 

floods, the Mississippi drowning whole cities 
unfamiliar. How could any form be a vessel 
adequate to such becoming, the stories unspooled 
through the skein of months as the virus erased 
more and more until Wally’s nimbused as these 

storm clouds, the sudden glowing ladders they let fall? 
But that’s not the moment I’m conjuring—it’s when 
my voyager afloat so many months brought back   
every flood story I carried. Drifting worlds, 
and Wai Min takes a shape I tell Wally as 

steady watermarks across the cold bare floor— 
Chinatown, South Pacific flashing its crimson, 
neoned waves tranced across Wai Min’s midnight eyes 
behind black shades, and that voice unraveling past 
each knocking winter pain. It’s another world 

I’m telling, Cognac and squalor. The foghorn’s haunting drone 
blends with that halting monotone, scarlet watermarks, 
the Sinkiang’s floodtides murky brown, the village 
become water, swept away. Three days floating on a door, 
his sister, the grandmother weaving stories endless 

beneath the waxed umbrella canopy she’s fashioned, 
stories to soothe the children wrapped in the curtain 
of her hair, to calm the ghost souls’ blurred lanterns. 
How rats swam to their raft, soaked cats, spirits 
she said, ghosts held tranced by the storied murmurous 

river. I have no spell, simply the foghorn’s song 
when voices unbodied, drift over water past 
the low dune this cottage nestles in becoming 
shape in motion stilled. No boundaries on this point, 
foghorn singing its come-home incantation over 

the ruthless currents. And isn’t it so 
we’re merely vessels given in grace, in mystery, 
just a little while, our fleet streaked moments? 
As this day is given, singular, chilly 
bolts of snow chenilled across the sky, the sea. 

How to cipher where one life begins and becomes 
another? Part the curtain and here’s my voyager 
afloat, gentle sleeper, sweet fish, dancer over 
water and he’s talking, laughing in 
that great four-poster bed he could not leave 

for months, a raft to buoy his furious radiant soul, 
if I may hazard to say that? Yes, 
there was laughter, the stories, the shining dogs— 
gold and black—his company. Voyager afloat 
so many months, banks of sunflowers he loved spitting 

their seeds. Tick. Black numerals on the sill. 
A world can be built anywhere & he spun, letting go. . . . 
The last time I held him, the last time we spoke, just 
a whisper—hoarse—that marries now this many-voiced mansion 
of storm and from him I’ve learned to slip my body, 

to be the storm governed by the law of bounty given 
then taken away. Shush and glide. This tide’s running 
high, its silken muscular tearing ruled by cycles,   
relentless, the drawn lavish damasks—teal, aquamarine, 
silvered steel, desire’s tidal forces, such urgent 

fullness, the elaborate collapse, and withdrawal 
beyond the drawn curtain that shows the secret 
desert of bare ruched sand. I’ve learned this,   
I’ve learned to be the horn calling home 
the journeyer, saying farewell. And here’s 

the foghorn’s simple two-note wail, 
mechanical stark aria that ripples 
out to shelter all of us— 
our mortal burden of dreams— 
adrift in the sea’s restless shouldering. 





subjects : Activities, Travels & Journeys, Nature, Seas, Rivers, & Streams