title : Suite for Emily

author : Lynda Hull

text : 
1. The Letter 

Everywhere the windows give up nothing 
but frost’s intricate veined foliage. 
Just engines shrilling pocked and frozen streets 
wailing toward some new disaster.   
No bright angels’ ladders going to split 
heaven this Chicago instant where the pier’s   
an iced fantastic: spiked, the glacial floes 
seize it greedy like a careless treasure— 

marquise diamonds, these round clear globes, the psychic’s 
crystal world spinning in her corner shop 
when I passed, a globe boundaried with turning 
silent winds and demons. Out here the pavement’s 
a slick graffitied strip: There’s more to life 
than violence. Someone’s added Yes, Sex and Drugs. 
Hello, Plague Angel. I just heard your wings 
hiss off the letter on my table—Emily’s 

in prison again, her child’s lost to the State, 
Massachusetts. Fatigue, pneumonia, 
the wasting away. In the secret hungering,   
the emptiness when we were young would come 
the drug’s good sweep like nothing else, 
godly almost the way we’d float immune 
& couldn’t nothing touch us, nothing. 
Somehow I’d thought you’d pass her over— 

positive yes—but never really sick, 
that flayed above her door there’d be some sign 
of mercy. But there’s only January’s 
rough ministry peeling my face away. 
Light like the cruel light of another century 
& I’m thinking of Dickinson’s letter, 
“Many who were in their bloom have gone 
to their last account and the mourners go about 

the streets.” The primer pages yellowing 
on her shelf beneath an album of pressed gentian: 
“Do most people live to be old? No, one half die 
before they are eight years old. But one in four lives 
to see twenty-one.” She’d known the bitter sponge 
pressed to the fevered forehead, the Death Angel’s 
dark familiar company, how she’d swirl her veils, 
how she’d lean over the ewer and basin 

blackening the water. This arctic water, this 
seething rustle—lamé, sequins, a glitter wrap 
trailing from a girl’s shoulders so the shadow pimps 
go hey princess, why you so sad tonight, 
let me make you happy, when she’s only tired, 
up all night & needing a hit to let her sleep. 
We know that story, the crest and billow 
& foam and fleeting fullness 

before the disappearing. Discs of hissing ice, 
doors you (I?) might fall through to the underworld 
of bars & bus stations, private rooms of 
dancing girls numb-sick & cursing the wilderness 
of men’s round blank faces. Spinning demons. 
Round spoon of powder hissing over the flame. 
Worlds within worlds, beneath worlds, worlds that flare 
and consume so they become the only world. 


   2. Holy City, City of Night 

What is that general rule which tells 
   how long a thing will live? The primer answers, 
Whatever grows quick decays quick: soon ripe, 
   soon rotten. The rust-blown calla gracing   
my table, those Boston girls 20 years gone, 
young men in lace & glitter washed alien 
   by gasoline sunsets, the burning sphere 
lapsing below night’s black rim. Live fast, die. . . 

we know the rest. Reckless anthem. 
   The pier cable’s ice-sleeved beneath 
my hands—miraculous, yes, to be here 
   januaried by this lake’s barbaric winterscape 
Dickinson might read as savage text 
& emblem of a deity indifferent. Her embassy lay 
   beyond the city of jasper & gold, the beaten 
wrought towers scripture promised the saved 

would enter. What heaven she found she made.   
   And so did we, worlds that sear, consume—earthly, 
delirious. Ignis fatuus. Strike the match, 
   the fizzing cap. But Oh Reader, the wild beauty 
of it, the whirring rush, blond hiss of aerial 
miles, worn stairways in every burning school 
   of nodding classrooms, the buzz-snap of 
talk blurring hallucinatory fraught 
avenues. Illusive inner city, drugged 
   majestic residence spiraled with staircases, 
balustrades rococoed, lapidary. Invisible empires 
   dreamt beneath the witchery of birds 
circling the Common with twilight, their caw 
& settle, the patterns as they wheel 
   over the pond’s reflective mirror bruised 
roseate, violet, deeper, the swanboats 

darkening into night’s charged dazzle, 
   Park Square joints gone radiant, the bus station 
burnished before the zap, the charge, the edge.   
   It was the life, wasn’t it? Compatriots you’d   
just love to die for, who’d jump you 
in a New York minute. But the glory 
   as the lights went up, torching the air chartreuse, 
lipsticked pink, casting embers, seraphic fires 

fallen earthward. Fallen, the furious emblems.   
   We were so young we’d spend & spend 
ourselves as if there’d be no reckoning, then grew 
   past caring. All the darkening chapters. 
Dream time, the inner time 
where towers and battlements erect 
   their coruscating glamour & how we’d glide, 
celebrities among them, the crowds falling back, 

dream deeper, gone & wake to daylight’s assault 
   knocking another bare room, the alley, the bathroom 
you inhabit like the thief you are. Ignis fatuus. 
   I can follow you there, Emily, we girls 
setting out a thousand ruined nights in the splendor 
of the torched & reckless hour. 
   Who wouldn’t trade heaven for that fleet city 
when winter beaks the shattered pane, 

when summer’s a nauseous shimmmer 
   of sexual heat, though sex is a numb machine 
you float above? When the place you walk into 
   is a scream in the shape of yourself. 
When it makes perfect sense to blow someone away 
for 20 bucks beyond even your bleak human universe. 
   When the only laughter that falls down 
is iron & godless. Here, I—the one who left— 

must falter where persists 
   this chrome traffic shrill, where the cable’s 
bitter alloy comes away in my hand, 
   this metaled pungence of hair and skin 
in wind persists riven as the taste of myself, 
the blood blooming healthy, 
   real in my mouth, a future’s lavish venues 
spread stunned before me. These hands. 


   3. Combat Zone/War Stories 

The district’s been demolished, sown with salt. 
The dazzling girls, girls, girls in platinum wigs 
have been lifted away by some infernal agency, 
the queens, exotic Amazons & rough-trade gay boys. 

Sometimes I go back to walk the streets all shops 
and swank hotels, the office blocks & occasional 
burnt-out shell. So American, this destruction 
& renewal, cities amnesiac where evening’s 

genesis falls through vast deserted silences, 
towers grown otherworldly with light 
thrown starlike from some alien world. Gone the Show Bar, 
the Mousetrap, the whole gaudy necklace 

of lacquer-dark underground lounges, halls 
of mirrors, music billowing dancers 
clean out of themselves beyond the dead-faced tricks, 
the sick voyeurs. The Combat Zone. I can map it 

in my mind, some parallel world, the ghost city 
beneath the city. Parallel lives, the ones 
I didn’t choose, the one that kept her. 
In all that dangerous cobalt luster 

where was safety? Home? When we were delirium 
on rooftops, the sudden thrill of wind dervishing 
cellophane, the shredded cigarettes. We were 
the dust the Haitians spit on to commemorate 

the dead, the click & slurried fall of beads 
across a doorway. In the torn & watered silk 
of night, the Zone exploded its shoddy neon orchid 
to swallow us in the scent of fear, emergency, 

that oily street perfume & weeping brick. 
Gossamer clothes, summertime and leaning 
against the long dusty cars, cruising siren songs. 
Summer? My memory flutters—had I—was there summer? 

Dancer, and floor, and cadence 
quite gathered away, and I a phantom, to you 
a phantom, rehearse the story. 
And now it’s autumn turning hard to winter, 

Thanksgiving, 1990, & all she wants is sweets 
so it’s apple pie barehanded & Emily’s 
spinning war stories, how bad she is: So, I say, 
go ahead and shoot me, put me out of my misery. 

Cut me motherfucker—my blood’s gonna kill you. 
Then she’s too tired to sit & in the blue 
kaleidoscopic TV shift I stroke 
her hair, the ruined hands. I didn’t know 

how sick I was—if the heroin wanted the AIDS, 
or if the disease wanted the heroin. She asks me 
to line up her collection of matchbox houses 
so we can make a street, so we can make a neighborhood.   


   4. Jail, Flames—Jersey, 1971 

The psychic’s globe whirls its winds: demons, 
   countless futures, the pasts. Only 
      thirteen the first time 
   I saw you in jail, just a kid looking 
up at me, the usual grey detective clamor, 

inkpads & sodium flash. Hauled out by the officials, 
   exemplary bad-news girl, they shoved 
      a lyric sheet at me. Command 
   recitation to sway you from straying.   
“King Heroin,” James Brown pompadoured like nobody’s 

business & here’s Death cartoonishly aloft on a white 
   winged horse, grim reaper lording it 
      over the shivering denizens 
   of a city, exaggerated as any Holy City, 
going down, down, down. Just a kid, you, peering out 

the jungle of your dark hair, greasy jeans, a tangle 
   of beads at your throat. Ludicrous, 
      I know, me declaiming within 
   the jail gleam that never sleeps all over us, 
that effluvium of backed-up plumbing. On my palm, 

the bar’s iron taint lingered for hours after. 
   It didn’t mean that much to me, seventeen, 
      my practiced sangfroid 
   chilling the terror, that long drop 
inside, the way you collapse to fall in flames. 

I might have said you’ll pay for the wild & reckless hour, 
   pay in the currency of sweat and shiver, 
      the future squandered, the course 
   of years reconfigured, relinquishment so 
complete it’s more utter than any falling in love. Falling 

instead in flames, burning tiles spiraling to litter 
   the courtyards of countless places that will 
      never be yours, the fingerprints, 
   tossed gloves & glittering costumes, flared 
cornices & parapets, shattering panes, smoked out 

or streaked with embers, the tinder of spools, such 
   a savage conflagration, stupid edge-game, 
      the way junkies tempt death, 
   over & over again, toy with it. I might have 
told you that. Everything you ever meant to be, pfft, 

out the window in sulphured matchlight, slow tinder 
   & strike, possession purely ardent as worship 
      & the scream working its way out 
   of your bones, demolition of wall & strut 
within until you’re stark animal need. That is 

love, isn’t it? Everything you meant to be falls 
   away so you dwell within a perfect 
      singularity, a kind of saint. 
   Pearl of great price. Majestic, searing, 
the crystal globe spins futures unimaginable, that 

crucible you know so well, Emily, viral fever refining 
   you to some essence of pain more furious   
      than these winter trees 
   stripped to black nerves above 
the El’s streaked girders, a harsh equation, some 

god’s iron laughter combing down time’s blind 
   & hush. Hush child, forgive me. 
      Twenty years later, you say 
   that night in jail you looked up 
at me & wanted to be me. And I didn’t care. 


   5. Address 

Hello Death Angel, old familiar, old nemesis. 
   In the deepest hours, I have recognized 
your floating shape. I’ve seen your breath 
   seduce the torn curtain 
masking the empty window, have crouched with you   
   in the doorway, curled in the alley 
hooded in your essence & shadow, have 
   been left blue, heart-stopped 
for yours, for yours. Death, 
   you are the bead in the raptor’s eye,   
Death you dwell in the funneling depths 
   of the heavens beyond each 
star’s keening shrill, Death you are the potion 
   that fills the vial, the night 
the monuments have swallowed. You live 
   in the maimed child wrapped in a wreckage 
of headlines. Death you center 
   in the fanged oval 
of the prison dog’s howl. Death you dwell within 
   the necropolis we wake to in nightmare’s 
hot electric wind. You glint 
   the edge of the boy’s razor,   
patient in the blasted stairwell. Everywhere 
   you walk deep lawns, TVs pollinating air 
with animals wired up to dance 
   for their food, with executions 
& quiz shows. You’re in the column 
   of subway wind roaring before each 
train’s arrival. I’ve seen you drape thoughtlessly 
   a woman’s hair over her face 
as the shot carried her forward into stop-time 
   & beyond anything she’s laid 
her money down for. Death your sliver works 
   swiftly through the bloodstream. 
Hello Death Angel, Plague is your sister. 
   I’ve seen her handiwork, heard 
the tortured breath, watched her loosen the hands 
   of the dazzling boys from each other. 
For love, love. I’ve seen the AIDS hotels 
   & sick ones begging homeless 
in the tunnels, the whispered conspiracies. 
   Shameless emissaries with your powders 
& wands, your lunar carnivorous flowers. 
   Tricks, legerdemain. I’ve seen you draw 
veined wings over the faces of sleepers, 
   the abandoned, the black feather that sweeps 
so tenderly. I’ve seen the stain you scribe 
   on the pavement, the glossy canopy of leaves 
you weave. I’ve seen waste & ruin, know 
   your kingdom for delirium, the furious thumbprints 
you’ve scored on the flesh of those you choose. 
   I’ve seen you slow-dance in a velvet mask, dip 
& swirl across dissolving parquet. 
   I’ve seen you swing open the iron gate— 
a garden spired in valerian, skullcap, blue vervain. 
   Seen you stir in the neat half-moons, fingernails 
left absently in a glazed dish. 
   Felons, I’ve cursed you in your greed, have spat 
& wept then acquiesced in your wake. Without rue 
   or pity, you have marked the lintels & blackened 
the water. Your guises multiply, bewildering 
   as the firmament’s careless jewelry. 
Death I have welcomed you to the rooms 
   where Plague has lain when the struggle is passed 
& lit the candles and blessed the ash.   
   Death you have taken my friends & dwell 
with my friends. You are the human wage. 
   Death I am tired of you. 


   6. Dartmouth Women’s Prison, 1992 

Emily, delirium’s your province. 
You dwell feverish in prison   
voiceless to plead   
your need before the agencies 
of government who cannot hear the buildings 
falling & oil exploding, only people walking 
& talking, cannon soft as velvet from parishes 
that do not know you are burning up, 
that seasons have rippled 
like a beast the grasses beyond 
the prison. 
                They cannot hear the strummed harp 
or the nerves, black trees swaying winter, 
cannot know your child is lost to you. 

The human wage that’s paid & paid? 

Once, we were two girls 
setting out toward that city 
of endless searing night, the route taking on 
the intricacy, the fumes & bafflements 
of a life a woman might dream turning 
feverish in her prison bunk. Probation violation,   
when broke & sick, no way home 
from the clinic, the detective going 
ride with me, just talk, that’s all 
I want. Twenty bucks and him crowing   
we just love to run you little sluts in. 

Em, if I could reach you through the dust motes’ 
spinning, infernoed dreams, I would dwell 
in the moon’s cool glistering 
your cell, the rough cloth, the reflection 
of your face given back in the steel basin’s 
water, in the smooth moan of women loving women, 
a cacophony of needs. I am there with you lost 
in the chaos of numbers, that nattering P.A. buzz, 
in the guards’ trolling clank & threat echoing 
walls so eloquent 
with all the high-frequency sizzle 
of anguish they’ve absorbed. 
Emily, I will bless your child, will 
hold for you the bitter sponge, 
would give you staff & orb, a firmament 
radiant & free. 

                     But these are phantoms, lies— 
I cannot follow where you are. On my street, 
the psychic’s crystal globe whirls pasts, futures 
but where you are is timeless. 
Pain—has an Element of Blank—It cannot recollect 
when it Began—or if there were 
a time when it was not— 
It has no Future—but itself. . . 

Off the lake a toothed wind keens 
& it’s just me here, the one who’s left. 
Just me helpless to change anything caught 
in this ellipsis between traffic, this 
fleet human delay, all around 
the wind singing like a mechanical ballerina 
a girl might hold in her hand, the one 
that watched your childhood bed, porcelain 
upturned gaze, stiff tutu, dust in the folds 
of that spindly piercing music sounding 
of voices winged over water, becoming   
water, & gone. 


   7. A Style of Prayer 

There is a prayer that goes Lord I am powerless 
   over these carnivorous streets, the fabulous 
      breakage, the world’s ceaseless perpetuum mobile, 

like some renaissance design, lovely & useless 
   to harness the forces of weather, the planet’s 
      dizzy spin, this plague. A prayer that asks 

where in the hour’s dark moil is mercy? 
   Ain’t no ladders tumbling down from heaven 
      for what heaven we had we made. An embassy 

of ashes & dust. Where was safety? Home? 
   Is this love, staff, orb & firmament? 
      Parallel worlds, worlds within worlds—chutes 

& trapdoors in the mind. Sisters & brothers, 
   the same thing’s going down all over town, town 
      after town. There is a prayer that goes Lord, 

we are responsible. Harrow us through the waves, 
   the runnels & lace that pound, comb, reduce us so 
      we may be vessels for these stories. 

Oh, the dazzling men torn one from the other, 
   these women taken, these motherless children. 
      Perhaps there’s no one to fashion such new grace, 

the world hurtling its blind proposition 
   through space & prayer’s merely a style of waiting 
      beyond the Hour of Lead— 

Remembered, if outlived, 
   As Freezing persons, recollect the Snow— 
      First Chill—then Stupor—then the letting go. . . 

But oh, let Emily become anything 
   but the harp she is, too human, to shiver 
      grievous such wracked & torn discord. Let her be 

the foam driven before the wind over the lakes, 
   over the seas, the powdery glow floating 
      the street with evening—saffron, rose, sienna 

bricks, matte gold, to be the good steam 
   clanking pipes, that warm music glazing the panes, 
      each fugitive moment the heaven we choose to make. 







subjects : Living, Coming of Age, Growing Old, Health & Illness, Disappointment & Failure, Death, Sorrow & Grieving, Life Choices, The Body, The Mind, Time & Brevity, Relationships, Friends & Enemies, Nature, Winter, Landscapes & Pastorals, Religion, Faith & Doubt, God & the Divine, The Spiritual, Social Commentaries, History & Politics, Crime & Punishment, Gender & Sexuality, Cities & Urban Life, Mythology & Folklore, Ghosts & the Supernatural