title : Bar Xanadu

author : Lynda Hull

text : 
A perfect veronica, invisible, scallops air 
before the bull, the bartender’s fluttering hands. 
Tipped with silken fruit tinseled gold,   
a dusty banderilla hangs above racked bottles, 
burnt-orange. Your lacquered fingers streak 
the cocktail napkin and the globe of cognac’s 

fragrant on the zinc bar. Fields of chamomile.   
Close your eyes and then the night turns to coal 
seamed with diamonds. Outside, a girl murmurs 
her tired price, in pesetas, to passing men.   
Irita, the barman calls when she wanders in 
to wash at the single coldwater tap. Just a fly-blown 

café on your functionary’s street of flats, bedrooms 
shuttered around their whispering, the shops that gleam 
by day with scaled cellophane piglets, mounded bins 
of fruit and olives. Irita rewinds her hair 
at the bar, a gilt rosette nestling its waves,   
tattered bullfight posters on the wall behind her 

and you think of Rita Hayworth tossing roses 
in Blood and Sand, the frayed banderilla.   
Such a lovely thing to torture an animal with, 
the corrida’s exacting choreography 
of life and death. Sometimes it’s soothing to evaporate 
in this smoke-patinaed air, abandoning 

your imposter’s life of embassy files breathing 
the military names and numbers, Torrejón’s 
precise cold barracks. Your face wavers, oddly calm 
in the mirror as the girl talks dancing and   
flamenco clubs to the barman, absinthe glass shining 
derangement in his hand. It’s the place in the night 

where you carve an uneasy confederacy   
from vapor and exhaustion, a trio—the alien, 
the clownish poseur, the girl with nothing to sell 
but herself and straitened, cataleptic dreams. 
She stretches, plays idly the slot machines 
spinning roses, babies and lemons, the brilliant 

suit of lights. The caramel glow of the barlamps haloes 
her hair, bitten lips. Another sip and the slots’ 
click is rosary beads wafting prayers up 
to a heaven of slink and spangle, quick bargains 
struck in alcoves, that old palm of chapped fingers 
slipping coins to the gas meter, of spreading stain 

across the counterpane. Around Bar Xanadu 
narrow streets fill with the violet steam 
of after-midnight, the pigeons’ soft venereal   
cooing that speak of want like this, that deep 
original loneliness. There are heartless places 
in every city you’ve lived. Cognac spreads 

its window of warmth and the drifting years return   
bordered with the crimes of night, with cramped 
rooms you’ve climbed to, dead as the money 
in your pockets. A “dimestore Mata Hari,” 
the bureau chief called you while he snipped 
a fresh cigar. On parched plains outside the city 

soldier boys drill before the fighter planes, glamorous 
with starlight, still floating half-asleep 
in some Iowa of vinyl booths and Formica, miles 
of hissing corn. But it’s closing hour and beneath 
your fingers the napkin snows its raddled lace 
across the bar and you must rise with them, rise 

to dust with the barman his green bottle, help him 
to don the sparkling jacket. Rise to strap   
the magic shoes to Irita’s feet 
and then you must walk with her these streets 
you’ll never leave, gritty with wind from Andalusia 
riffling your skirt in the scent of blood oranges and sweat.




subjects : Living, Growing Old, Disappointment & Failure, Life Choices, The Body, The Mind