title : Belongings

author : Sandra M. Gilbert

text : 
—in memory of Angela Marie Incoronata Caruso Mortola,  May 21, 1903–January 14, 2001
1 

In-and-out sun   like the light of her mind   that knows 
and doesn’t   feels and forgets   pelts of rain 
hid and seek   of thought   first gray then rose 
but still a steady backlight   (sometimes hidden): 
“Remember Woody Allen’s line?   I’m not   
like that   I don’t care when it happens   where 
I just don’t want to die   not scared   not that 
I just don’t want to   and I told the doctor!” 
and the doctor   laughing “Cute old lady   said 
she doesn’t care about the why and wherefore 
she just doesn’t want to die . . .” and therefore? 
then she forgets   smiles   turns her head 
to nod   grande dame   at shadows on the walls 
that gather where the light collects   and falls 


2 

They gather   where the light collects and falls 
we can’t see them   but she seems to think 
at least a few are smiling   so she feels 
she has to say hello   politely thank 
these thoughtful ghosts who visit   sister   brothers 
Sunday best in black   old Brooklyn friends 
who hardly see   the gulf of sixty years 
mama and papa   severe Sicilian bookends 
“Come in, come in” her eyes light up   she waves 
and beckons all to chairs around her bed 
so she can boast to brothers   and their wives 
of all the special things   her daughter did 
and how her grandkids won   so many prizes 
and as she vaunts   and glows   her smile blazes 


3 

But though she glows   but though her smile blazes 
the sister flickers   fades   the brothers falter 
her eyesight’s bad   it’s hard to see their faces 
as if she peered through gauze   or a thick filter 
and then the others come   the ones she calls 
“co-tenants” of her rooms   the lovers screwing 
coarse as goats   in corners   nasty girls 
smart-aleck guys   who do know what they’re doing 
and what they do   is occupy her place 
back home they swarmed   all over her apartment 
set up a stove   behind her lovely bookcase 
nursed babies on her sofa   bold indifferent 
and even here   still shameless in their clingings 
they mean to steal   they’ll steal   her best belongings 


4 

What should she do   to safeguard   her belongings? 
she begs for help   urges us to lock 
to triple lock   the doors   to hide her things 
her pearls right   here   her fruitwood in New York 
her mother’s hand-carved walnut chairs   the leather- 
surfaced desk   at which my father sat 
so long ago   wearing the cashmere sweater 
grandma bought him   and the Sulka shirt 
Listen!   Are we listening!   Have we heard? 
How well he dressed!   How beautiful their place! 
four rooms in Queens   what lots couldn’t afford 
in an age of breadlines   shameful jobs   or worse 
“Tuono di Dio!”   thunder of God   she looses 
the curse she learned in childhood   for most uses 


5 

The curses learned   in childhood   have their uses 
Tuono di Dio!   she swears when they strip her   bare 
to bathe her   Tuono di Dio!   when the nurses 
slide the soiled bed pads   to the floor 
or prop her   in the wheelchair   to be fed 
thunder of God   echoes along the halls 
when she tries to fight   the husky nurse’s aide 
come to sponge her bruises   stains and spills 
embarrassed   we shiver   in the corridor 
while she flails   and shrieks for the police 
“Tuono di Dio!   Call the police!”   God’s thunder 
will scorch us if we leave her   in this place 
away from her apartment   calm   and peace 
away from her belongings   purse and keys 


6 

Away from her belongings   purse   and keys 
(and crumpled Kleenex   reading glasses coins 
and comb she always   carries   in that purse) 
she isn’t real!   she might be only bones! 
yet the belongings   longings   must go on 
the bookcase and the rugs   and tables must 
survive   outlast her   so she tells her grandson 
how to plan an auction   in the east 
there are the costs   of those belongings   that 
the value of mahogany   and this 
the price of sterling silver (which she fought 
to buy—a fifth-grade teacher   in the thirties—) 
and the bracelets   furs   her in-laws gave 
too bad they can’t   go with her to the grave! 


7 

What happens to belongings   after the grave? 
They’ll be   up here and she   she’ll be   down there 
what of the   stuff she worked   so hard   to have? 
polished mahogany   and mink   and silver 
and even the fifteen-year-old   television 
still good   still just right for the nightly news 
and the brand-new   vacuum cleaner   even 
still a— a something   someone ought   to choose 
her face is crumpling   like a handkerchief 
don’t give it all   away   don’t give it up 
if you don’t want it   at least sell it off! 
don’t let the others   have it either   stop 
the thieves before   they drag it all    away 
don’t let my belongings   go astray. . . . 


8 

Don’t let my   belongings   go astray 
call the super   tell the doorman   keep 
the windows locked   and barred   the crooks away 
the one who break   and enter   when you sleep 
the ones   who follow   sullen   knife and rape 
how many years   she’s warned us   can’t we hear 
they’ll pick the locks   they’ll climb the fire   escape 
just look   the crooks are here   are everywhere 
a sudden nod   a glance at   the next bed 
where a wizened   person   gasps and snores 
that one now   she saw her   yes she did 
peering in closets   rummaging in drawers 
even in hospitals   they have   no pity 
they rob you   when they see   your things are   pretty 


9 

Yet O it’s nice   that all her things are   pretty 
her smile blazes   back in Jackson Heights 
(on one of the   better   blocks   in New York City) 
her beautiful   apartment   basks and waits 
a hush of rugs   a drawn Venetian   blind 
keeping the silence   keeping the bars   of shadow 
gathered like silent   guardians   around 
the hanging   shelf   the Wedgewood   the piano 
and there the family   photographs   are massed 
my father’s face   blade-thin   in sepia 
my baby self   in flounces   or undressed 
from times   when she was poor   but happier 
belongings blurry   as if   underwater 
bearing the prints   of mother   father   daughter 


10 

How far the age   of mother   father   daughter! 
my baby room with walls   now pink   now blue 
(but never yellow   though I begged   I fought her) 
and the tiny snowman   globe   where snowflakes   flew 
and the little silver   Virgin Mary   shrine 
whose key I   turned   to play Our Lady’s song 
“Ave Maria”   tinkling   out of tune 
and the gray   hooked rug   where silent bluebirds sang 
and a rabbit ran   away   among the trees 
but never   vanished   never could   escape 
whatever chased him   from the knitted haze 
a scary   thing   because   it had no shape 
though now the whole   room’s painted hazy   gray 
and the rabbit   trees   and birds   raveled away 


11 

When did her mind   begin to ravel   away? 
—that time she fell   outside   the beauty parlor 
(getting pretty for   her grandson’s    birthday)? 
she didn ’t   answer   when we tried   to call her 
and soon   with mop and broom   she fought the others 
called 911   the super   the police 
there on the sofa   sat   the nursing mothers 
the lovers   crawled and thrashed   under the bookcase 
we flew   to Queens   we packed up all   her things 
the fox-head furs   her mother ’s lion-necklace 
“But what about all my other   best   belongings?” 
she worried   then gave up   resigned   to silence 
a roar of takeoff   buckled in   she hissed 
“Here’s to my new   adventure   in the west!” 


12 

At sundown   tantrums   shake the sunset west 
the nurses turn her toward the flashing   window 
“See the flowers? See the pretty bird’s nest?” 
bushes tug in tubs   on the patio 
where a night   wind   rises   over Astroturf 
batters the waiting   tables   chairs   and wheelchairs 
as if they stood   in a swirl   of Pacific surf 
whose icy water   glitters   darkens   clears 
“Here’s dinner, hon!” the nurse’s aide   with bib 
holds out a tray of lukewarm   grown-up   mush 
last week a fall   tore muscles   cracked a rib 
how did   she fall   did someone   really push? 
she tries to remember   strains to see   remembers 
(sometimes) the names   of sundown   visitors 


13 

Sometimes the names   of sundown visitors 
hook into thought   sometimes the sounds   unravel 
blur   sister   brothers   TV commentators 
(Frank and Vito turn into Ted Koppel) 
I visit   afternoons   bring cupcakes   chocolate 
the only stuff she   ever wants   to eat 
can barely swallow though   one night past midnight 
she coughs   a little   chokes on   her own spit 
the night nurse   didn’t hear   the radio 
was turned on loud   she’s kind of scared   and sorry 
and puts a rose   on the poor   old lady’s   pillow 
and a mortician   calls   and tells us   not to worry 
above the sunlit bay   the slicing planes 
rise fast   and one speeds east   with her “remains” 


14 

Back among   her belongings   her remains 
glide north northwest   in a shiny   SUV 
designed to weather snowstorms   freezing rains 
far from the simmering   fields   of Sicily 
the East Coast cemetery’s stony   pressed 
into a cleft   of hills   black ice   I skid on 
leaning to greet the freckled   hearty   priest 
looking   not looking at the box   she’s laid in 
at the edge of the polished   boards   that hold her husband 
the priest   says the words   she scorned   she didn’t believe 
(she has to be blessed   to belong   to holy ground) 
and O she would   scold us   if she were still alive! 
no Tuono di dio   no bolt   so fierce and true 
as the light of her mind   that felt   that thought   that knew 





subjects : Living, Health & Illness, Growing Old, The Mind