title : Library

author : Brian Culhane

text : 
Paulatim lachrymas rerum experentia tersit.  Petrarch
Father’s books lying on the living-room floor 
Must be divided into threes: art history, 
Classical letters and, left from my days here, 
Unsteady stacks of quasi-educational lore 
That show yellowing Geographic scientists 
Perennially lost in rain forest mists. 
An instant choice will cull some from the rest 
So they may become mine—a banausic test. 

Prewar light glimmers in the apartment: 
A shadowplay that summons an adolescence 
Of slammed doors and risible nothings 
Hurled at retreating parental backs 
—The most telling blows always sotto voce— 
As I stormed and wept and read in silence. 
Now, standing again in silence, I stare 
At a word trove given two sons to share. 

Some are dated in the first blank page: 1 
January 1938 this reads, as if a resolution 
Made (and kept?); this ruddy leather edition 
States simply Property of—with no name given. 
I gesture toward the emptiness of gifts 
Prematurely bestowed in illness’s ruin 
And blow dust off an enfeebled spine, 
Filling lungs with belletristic grime. 

It’s all some forgotten chore from a childhood 
The hall mirror charitably declares was good. 
Pictures of other libraries fill my head: 
Weighty tomes I hauled to girlfriends’ walkups, 
Barely unpacked before again in boxes; 
Or Sophoclean dramas, lost to ancient fires, 
Which exist in name only; or that fable 
Of an infinitely circular Library of Babel 

Borges saw as self-referential: nooks, 
Corridors, dead ends, twisting stairwells: 
Bibliographic cargo cults and infidels. 
In his bed, dreaming of a golden age of looks 
And cars, booze and fine clothes, my father snores 
And chokes and comes to. . . . Sunlight pours 
Into empty bookcases. Where in hell are they?! 
If memory then corrects, questions stay 

And, refracting off walls, gather numb force 
As I read a volume plucked at random 
Only to start up when hoarse ripples burn 
My innermost ear: Where, where, where? 
Soon my father will awaken to find no air. 
One tattered cover shows a boy’s ray-gun 
Pointed to the sun: the future, that much is clear. 
Somewhere where this library can cohere. 

Nearly finished, I stumble on Petrarch’s Epistles 
And, apropos of age, find: In that passing, I shall 
Not seem myself: another brow, other habits, a new form 
Of the mind, another voice sounding. . . . Father whistles 
Down the hallways for his lackadaisical firstborn. 
Little by little, experience wipes dry our tears. 
The job’s done—leaving me to calculate the years 
I withheld my love, and the years I’ve left to mourn.




subjects : Family & Ancestors, Living, Relationships, Arts & Sciences, Reading & Books, Coming of Age, Philosophy, Activities, Indoor Activities