title : Many Scientists Convert to Islam

author : Nomi Stone

text : 
Conversations with a Muslim friend
1 

So, if you don’t believe in full it means you don’t 
believe. Words tumble onto the rock. A book 
happens. 

Okay then tell me about heaven’s beautiful 
food and women. Who are these women? 

My friend says, “This life is like a twenty-minute train ride.” 
He says, “I live inside my 
faith more fully every day.” 

I am standing on soaked pavement outside 
that majestic hotel in the center of town. Just before 
dark, the birds come in a furious swoop like 
hornets, stinging the sky to let in 

what is on the other side. 


         2 

Then the next life is equally 
about the body, denied in the first? 

“Do you know the Prophet knew the exact number of bones in the human 
body? And why do you ask so many questions? You ask 
more questions than you take in breaths of air.” 

The birds beat. They crumple in 
rivers of sky. At the same time every day. Kierkegaard said that 

every instant a man in despair is contracting it. My friend is not 
in despair; I am not in despair. 


         3 

Kierkegaard says there are three kinds of despair: despair 
at not being conscious of having a self, despair at not being 
willing to be oneself, and despair at willingness to be 

oneself. Listen, the train. Why complain about 
the seat, the air conditioner? Just do 
your best until you arrive. 

During Ramadan, I fasted a week. I went to the mosque. 

My friend’s uncle said: 
“So you are becoming Muslim?” I said: “No.” He said: “Shame 
on you.” 

In the cold November current, there is a whirring of wings. Sometimes 
they cloud into petals, sometimes they don’t. 


         4 

When the forehead presses to the earth, the blood moves 
down. In the joining, the self lightens. You must count the three perfect 
joints of each finger to keep time. Make no mistake, you leave the body only 

through the body. The train ride. This quiet voice that is borrowed or my own.




subjects : Faith & Doubt, Friends & Enemies, Religion, Relationships, Islam, Arts & Sciences, Philosophy