title : Dear Lacuna, Dear Lard:

author : Paisley Rekdal

text : 
I’m here, one fat cherry
               blossom blooming like a clod,
  
 one sad groat glazing, a needle puling thread,
               so what, so sue me. These days what else to do but leer
  
 at any boy with just the right hairline. Hey! I say,
               That’s one tasty piece of nature. Tart Darkling,
  
 if I could I’d gin, I’d bargain, I’d take a little troll
               this moolit night, let you radish me awhile,
  
 let you gag and confound me. How much I’ve struggled
               with despicing you, always; your false poppets, relentless
  
 distances. Yet plea-bargaining and lack of conversation
               continue to make me
  
 your faithful indefile. I’m lonely. I’ve turned
               all rage to rag, all pratfalls fast to fatfalls for you,
  
 My Farmer in the Dwell. So struggle, strife,
               so strew me, to bell with these clucking mediocrities,
  
 these anxieties over such beings thirty, still smitten
               with this heaven never meant for, never heard from.
  
 You’ve said we’re each pockmarked like a golf course
               with what can’t be said of us, bred in us,
  
 isn’t our tasty piece of nature. But I tell you
               I’ve stars, I’ve true blue depths, have learned to use
  
 the loo, the crew, the whole slough of pill-popping
               devices without you, your intelligent and pitiless graze.
  
 Everyone knows love is just a euphemism
               for you’ve failed me anyway. So screw me.
  
 Bartering Yam, regardless of want I’m nothing
               without scope, hope, nothing
  
 without your possibility. So let’s laugh
               like the thieves we are together, the sieves:
  
 you, my janus gate, my Sigmund Fraud,
               my crawling, crack-crazed street sprawled out,
  
 revisible, spell-bound.
               Hello, joy. I’m thirsty. I’m Pasty Rectum.
  
 In your absence I’ve learned to fill myself
               with starts. Here’s my paters. Here’s my blue.
  
 I just wanted to write again and say
               how much I’ve failed you.





subjects : Living, Disappointment & Failure, Relationships, Love, Arts & Sciences, Humor & Satire