title : The Third Hour of the Night

author : Frank Bidart

text : 
When the eye 
  
 When the edgeless screen receiving 
 light from the edgeless universe 
  
 When the eye first 
  
 When the edgeless screen facing 
 outward as if hypnotized by the edgeless universe 
  
 When the eye first saw that it 
  
 Hungry for more light 
 resistlessly began to fold back upon itself      TWIST 
  
 As if a dog sniffing
  
 Ignorant of origins 
 familiar with hunger 
  
 As if a dog sniffing a dead dog 
  
 Before nervous like itself but now 
 weird inert cold nerveless 
  
 Twisting in panic had abruptly sniffed itself 
  
 When the eye
 first saw that it must die      When the eye first 
  
 Brooding on our origins you 
 ask  When and I say 
  
 Then 
  
                    •
  
 wound-dresser      let us call the creature 
  
 driven again and again to dress with fresh 
 bandages and a pail of disinfectant 
 suppurations that cannot 
 heal for the wound that confers existence is mortal 
  
 wound-dresser 
  
 what wound is dressed      the wound of being 
  
                    •
  
 Understand that it can drink till it is 
 sick, but cannot drink till it is satisfied. 
  
 It alone knows you. It does not wish you well. 
  
 Understand that when your mother, in her only 
 pregnancy, gave birth to twins 
  
 painfully stitched into the flesh, the bone of one child 
  
 was the impossible-to-remove cloak that confers 
 invisibility. The cloak that maimed it gave it power. 
  
 Painfully stitched into the flesh, the bone of the other child 
  
 was the impossible-to-remove cloak that confers 
 visibility. The cloak that maimed it gave it power. 
  
 Envying the other, of course each twin 
  
 tried to punish and become the other. 
 Understand that when the beast within you 
  
 succeeds again in paralyzing into unending 
  
 incompletion whatever you again had the temerity to 
 try to make 
  
 its triumph is made sweeter by confirmation of its 
  
 rectitude. It knows that it alone 
 knows you. It alone remembers your mother’s 
  
 mother’s grasping immigrant bewildered 
  
 stroke-filled slide-to-the-grave 
 you wiped from your adolescent American feet. 
  
 Your hick purer-than-thou overreaching veiling 
  
 mediocrity. Understand that you can delude others but 
 not what you more and more 
  
 now call the beast within you. Understand 
  
 the cloak that maimed each gave each power. 
 Understand that there is a beast within you 
  
 that can drink till it is 
  
 sick, but cannot drink till it is satisfied. Understand 
 that it will use the conventions of the visible world 
  
 to turn your tongue to stone. It alone 
  
 knows you. It does 
 not wish you well.  These are instructions for the wrangler. 
  
  
 II
  
 Three Fates. One 
 fate, with three faces. 
  
 Clotho      Lachesis      Atropos 
  
 Thread spun by one 
 from all those forever unspun. 
  
 Thread touched by one and in 
 touching twisted into something 
  
 forever unlike all others spun. 
  
 Thread touched by one and in 
 touching withered to nothing. 
  
 Atropos      Lachesis      Clotho 
  
 Three, who gave us in recompense 
 for death 
  
 the first alphabet, to engrave in stone 
 what is most evanescent, 
  
 the mind. According to Hesiod, daughters of Night. 
  
                    •
  
 Unless teeth devour it it 
 rots: now is its season. 
  
 My teeth have sunk into firm-skinned 
 pears so succulent time stopped. 
  
 When my wife, dead now 
  
 ten years, pulls her dress over her petticoats 
 and hair, the air crackles, her hair rising 
  
 tangles in ecstasy. We are electric ghosts.
  
                    •
  
 You hear the strange cricket in the oven
 sing, and ask what it sings.
  
 This is what it sings.
  
 Because Benvenuto in my native tongue
 means welcome, write
  
 here lies an artist who did not
 recoil from residence on earth — but,
 truly named, welcomed it.
  
 But I mis-spoke: not wife. Servant: model: mother
 of my child, also now dead.
  
                    •
  
 In prison, immured in the black pit where the Pope
 once fed Benedetto da Foiano less and less each day
 until God’s will, not the Pope’s own hand, killed him, —
  
 where outside my door each day the castellan
 repeated that darkness will teach me I am
 a counterfeit bat, and he a real one, —
  
 blackness, silence so unremitted
 I knew I had survived another day only by the malignant
 welcome singsong of his triumphant voice, —
  
 Benvenuto is a counterfeit bat, and I a real one, —
  
 where God had not found me worthy of seeing the sun
 even in a dream, I asked the God of Nature
 what unexpiated act the suffocation of my senses, such
  
 suffering, served to expiate.
  
 (This was my first prison.)
  
                    •
  
 For the two murders I had committed, — their just,
 free but necessary cause
  
 revenge, however imperfect the justice —
  
 two successive Popes recognized the necessity
 and pardoned me. Absolved me.
  
 Because my fame as a maker in gold and silver
  
 preceded me, though I was hardly more
 than an apprentice, when Pope Clement came into
  
 possession of the second largest diamond in the world
  
 he summoned me from Florence to Rome — called me
 into his presence to serve him. To crown the resplendent
  
 glittering vestment covering his surplice, he wanted
  
 a golden clasp big and round as a small
 plate, with God the Father in half-relief above the diamond
  
 and cherubs, arms raised, below. Hurry, he said,
  
 finish it quickly, so that I may enjoy its
 use a little while.
  
 Pope Clement, unlike the great I now serve, was
  
 an excellent, subtle
 connoisseur; he approved my design.
  
 Each week he summoned me into the presence
  
 two or three times, eager to inspect my progress.
 Then Cecchino, my brother, two years younger than I
  
 and still beardless, died —
  
 was killed, as he tried to avenge the unjust killing of
 a comrade by the ruthless guard of the Bargello.
  
 Thus was stolen from him the chance to incise
  
 his presence into the hard, careless surface of the world.
 The fool who killed him
  
 in what justice must call self-defense
  
 later proved his nature by
 boasting of it.
  
 His boasting enraged, maddened me. In this
  
 great grief the Pope rebuked me: You act as if
 grief can change death.
  
 Sleepless, eatless, by day I worked at the Pope’s
  
 absorbing golden button — and by night, hypnotized
 as a jealous lover, I watched and followed
  
 the fatuous creature who murdered my brother.
  
 At last, overcoming my repugnance to an enterprise
 not-quite-praiseworthy, I decided
  
 to end my torment. My dagger entered the juncture
  
 of the nape-bone and the neck
 so deep into the bone
  
 with all my strength I could not pull it out.
  
 I ran to the palace of Duke Alessandro — for those who
 pursued me knew me. The Pope’s natural son,
  
 later he became Duke of Florence, before his murder
  
 by his own cousin Lorenzino, whose too-familiar
 intimacies and pretensions to power
  
 he not only indulged but openly mocked.
  
 Alessandro told me to stay indoors
 for eight days. For eight days I stayed indoors, working
  
 at the jewel the Pope had set his heart on.
  
 For eight days the Pope failed
 to summon me. Then his chamberlain, saying that all was
  
 well if I minded my work and kept silent, ushered me
  
 into the presence. The Pope cast so menacing
 a glance toward me I trembled.
  
 Examining my work, his countenance cleared,
  
 saying that I had accomplished a vast amount
 in a short time. Then he said, Now that you are
  
 cured, Benvenuto — change your life.
  
 I promised that I would.  Soon after this, I opened
 a fine shop, my first; and finished the jewel.
  
                    •
  
 As the knife descended (forgive me, O God of
 Nature, but thus you have arranged it, —)
  
 to my fevered mind
 each moment was infinite, and mine.
  
                    •
  
 Late one night, in farewell, Michelangelo
 turning to me said, Benvenuto,
  
 you deliver yourself into their hands.
  
                    •
  
 Here I leapt   Here I leapt   Here I leapt   Here I leapt
 the shrilling cricket in the shrilling summer evening
  
 sings; as did my father in the sweet years
  
 he served the pleasure of the lords of Florence
 as a piper, in the Consort of Pipers.
  
 Imagine my father, no longer young, married, still
  
 childless, an engineer who designs bridges and
 battlements for the Duke, but whose
  
 first love is music — the flute. He joined
  
 the Duke’s Consort of Pipers. Now his nights
 often are spent not bending over charts and plans
  
 but dazzled at the court of Lorenzo, called The Magnificent —
  
 the same Lorenzo who once plucked Michelangelo, still
 a boy, from among the horde of the merely-talented
  
 bending to copy the masters in the ducal palace.
  
 Lorenzo, with his father’s consent, adopted
 the boy; fed him at his own table.
  
 Imagine, tonight, the brief concert is over —
  
 the Consort of Pipers (respectable, honorable
 amateurs: small merchants, a banker, a scholar)
  
 mingle, slightly awed, with an ambassador, a Cardinal . . .
  
 Suddenly Lorenzo is at my father’s ear: He stood
 not six inches from me.
  
 Not six inches from my father’s ear Lorenzo
  
 in a low voice as he begins to move through
 the crowd followed by his son Piero
  
 (as now my father must struggle to follow)
  
 tells my father he has painfully and increasingly
 remarked that the flute has led my father to neglect
  
 his fine engineering talent and therefore my
  
 father will understand why Piero and the Duke
 must dismiss him from the Consort of Pipers.
  
 Lorenzo, entering the private apartments, was gone.
  
 In later years, my father repeated to his
 children: He stood not six inches from me.
  
 It is a lie. It is a lie that the Medici and you and I
  
 stand on the same earth. What the sane eye
 saw, was a lie: —
  
 two things alone cross the illimitable distance
  
 between the great and the rest of
 us, who serve them: —
  
 a knife; and art.
  
                    •
  
 The emblem of Florence is the lion; therefore
 lions, caged but restless and living, centuries ago
  
 began to announce to the Piazza della Signoria
  
 this is the fearsome seat of the free
 government of the Republic of Florence.
  
 Duke Cosimo, hating the noise and smell, had them
  
 moved behind the palace. For years, I had known
 the old man who fed and tended the lions, —
  
 one day he humbly asked me if I could make a ring
  
 unlike all others for his daughter’s wedding.
 I said yes, of course; but, as payment for its
  
 rarity, I wanted him to drug the strongest lion
  
 asleep, so that I could
 examine, for my art, his body.
  
 He said he knew no art of drugging; such poison
  
 could kill the creature; a week later,
 in fury he said yes.
  
 The animal was numbed but not
  
 sleeping; he tried to raise
 his great head, as I lay lengthwise against his warm body;
  
 the head fell back. My head
  
 nestling behind his, each arm, outstretched, slowly
 descending along each leg, at last with both hands I
  
 pulled back the fur and touched a claw.
  
 This creature whose claw waking could kill me, —
 . . . I wore its skin.
  
                    •
  
 After the Medici were returned from eighteen years’
 banishment, placed over us again not by the will
  
 of Florentines, but by a Spanish army —
  
 my father, though during the republic he regained
 his position as piper, ever loyal to the Medici
  
 wrote a poem celebrating his party’s victory
  
 and prophesying the imminent
 advent of a Medici pope. Then Julius II died;
  
 Cardinal de’ Medici, against expectation, was elected;
  
 the new pope wrote my father that he must
 come to Rome and serve him.
  
 My father had no will to travel. Then Jacopo
  
 Salviati, in power because married to a Medici,
 took from my father his place at the Duke’s new court;
  
 took from him his profit, his hope, his will.
  
 Thus began that slow extinguishment
 of hope, the self ’s obsequies for the self
  
 at which effacement I felt not only a helpless
  
 witness, but
 cause, author.
  
 He said I was his heart.
  
 I had asked to be his heart
 before I knew what I was asking.
  
 Against his mania to make me a musician
  
 at fifteen I put myself to the goldsmith’s trade;
 without money
  
 or position, he now could not oppose this.
  
 Help the boy — for his father is poor
 rang in my ears as I began to sell
  
 the first trinkets I had made. Later, to escape
  
 the plague then raging, he made me
 quickly leave Florence; when I returned,
  
 he, my sister, her husband and child, were dead.
  
 These events, many occurring before my birth, I
 see because my father described them
  
 often and with outrage.
  
 To be a child is to see things and not
 know them; then you know them.
  
                    •
  
 Despite the malicious
 stars, decisive at my birth: despite their
  
 sufficient instrument, the hand within me that moves
  
 against me: in the utter darkness of my first prison
 God granted me vision:
  
 surrounded by my stinks, an Angel, his beauty
  
 austere, not wanton, graciously
 showed me a room in half-light crowded with the dead:
  
 postures blunted as if all promise of change
  
 was lost, the dead
 walked up and down and back and forth:
  
 as if the promise of change
  
 fleeing had stolen the light.
 Then, on the wall, there was a square of light.
  
 Careless of blindness I turned my eyes
  
 to the full sun. I did not care
 to look on anything again but this. The sun
  
 withering and quickening without distinction
  
 then bulged out: the boss
 expanded: the calm body of the dead Christ
  
 formed itself from the same
  
 substance as the sun. Still on the cross,
 he was the same substance as the sun.
  
                    •
  
 The bait the Duke laid
 was Perseus. Perseus
  
 standing before the Piazza della Signoria.
  
 My statue’s audience and theater, Michelangelo’s
 David; Donatello’s
  
 Judith With the Head of Holofernes . . .
  
 Here the school of Florence, swaggering, says
 to the world: Eat.
  
 Only Bandinelli’s odious Hercules and Cacus
  
 reminds one that when one walks
 streets on earth one steps in shit.
  
 Duke Cosimo desired, he said, a statue of Perseus
  
 triumphant, after intricate trials able
 at last to raise high
  
 Medusa’s mutilated head — he imagined,
  
 perhaps, decapitation of the fickle
 rabble of republican Florence . . .
  
 I conceived the hero’s gesture as more generous: —
  
 Kill the thing that looked
 upon makes us stone.
  
 Soon enough, on my great bronze bust of the great
  
 Duke, I placed — staring out from his chest —
 Medusa, her head not yet cut, living.
  
                    •
  
 Remember, Benvenuto, you cannot bring your
 great gifts to light by your strength alone
  
 You show your greatness only through
  
 the opportunities we give you
 Hold your tongue     I will drown you in gold
  
                    •
  
 As we stared down at the vast square, at
 David, at Judith — then at Hercules and Cacus
  
 approved and placed there by Cosimo himself —
  
 from high on the fortress lookout of the palace,
 against whose severe façade so many
  
 human promises had been so cunningly
  
 or indifferently crushed, I told the Duke that I
 cannot make his statue. My brief return from France
  
 was designed only to provide for the future of
  
 my sister and six nieces, now without husband
 or father. The King of France alone had saved me
  
 from the Pope’s dungeon — not any lord of Italy!
  
 At this, the Duke looked at me
 sharply, but said nothing.
  
 All Rome knew that though I had disproved
  
 the theft that was pretext for my arrest, Pope Paul
 still kept me imprisoned, out of spite —
  
 vengeance of his malignant son Pier Luigi, now
  
 assassinated by his own retainers.
 One night at dinner, the King’s emissary gave the Pope
  
 gossip so delicious that out of merriment, and about to vomit
  
 from indulgence, he agreed
 to free me. I owed King Francis
  
 my art, my service. The same stipend he once paid
  
 Leonardo, he now paid me; along with a house in Paris.
 This house was, in truth, a castle . . .
  
 I omitted, of course, quarrels with the King’s
  
 mistress, demon who taunted me for the slowness
 of my work, out of her petty hatred of art itself;
  
 omitted her insistence to the King that I
  
 am insolent and by example teach
 insolence to others. Omitted that I overheard the King
  
 joke with her lieutenant: —
  
 Kill him, if you can find me
 his equal in art.
  
 Before the school of Florence I had only been able,
  
 young, to show myself as goldsmith
 and jeweler; not yet as sculptor.
  
 Duke Cosimo then announced that all the King of France
  
 had given me, he would surpass: boasting,
 he beckoned me to follow him past the public
  
 common galleries, into the private apartments . . .
  
 Dutiful abashed puppet, I followed; I knew
 I would remain and make his statue.
  
                    •
  
 In the mirror of art, you who are familiar with the rituals of
 decorum and bloodshed before which you are
  
 silence and submission
  
 while within stone
 the mind writhes
  
 contemplate, as if a refrain were wisdom, the glistening
  
 intrication
 of bronze and will and circumstance in the mirror of art.
  
                    •
  
 Bandinelli for months insinuated in the Duke’s ear
 Perseus never would be finished: —
  
 I lacked the art, he said, to move from the small
  
 wax model the Duke rightly praised, to lifesize
 bronze whose secrets tormented even Donatello.
  
 So eighteen months after work began, Duke Cosimo grew
  
 tired, and withdrew his subsidy. Lattanzo Gorini,
 spider-handed and gnat-voiced, refusing to hand over
  
 payment said, Why do you not finish?
  
 Then Bandinelli hissed Sodomite! at
 me — after my enumeration, to the court’s
  
 amusement, of the sins against art and sense
  
 committed by his Hercules and Cacus, recital
 designed to kill either him or his authority . . .
  
 The Duke, at the ugly word, frowned
  
 and turned away. I replied that the sculptor of 
 Hercules and Cacus must be a madman to think that I
  
 presumed to understand the art that Jove in heaven
  
 used on Ganymede, art nobly practiced here on earth
 by so many emperors and kings. My saucy speech
  
 ended: My poor wick does not dare to burn so high!
  
 Duke and court broke into laughter. Thus was
 born my resolve to murder Bandinelli.
  
                    •
  
 I’d hurl the creature to hell. In despair at what must
 follow — the Duke’s rage, abandonment of my
  
 never-to-be-born Perseus — I cast
  
 myself away for lost: with a hundred crowns
 and a swift horse, I resolved first to bid
  
 farewell to my natural son, put to wet-nurse in Fiesole;
  
 then to descend to San Domenico, where Bandinelli
 returned each evening. Then, after blood, France.
  
 Reaching Fiesole, I saw the boy
  
 was in good health; his wet-nurse
 was my old familiar, old gossip, now
  
 married to one of my workmen. The boy
  
 clung to me: wonderful in a two-year-old, in
 grief he flailed his arms when at last
  
 in the thick half-dusk
  
 I began to disengage myself. Entering the square
 of San Domenico on one side, I saw my prey
  
 arriving on the other. Enraged that he still
  
 drew breath, when I reached him
 I saw he was unarmed. He rode a small sorry
  
 mule. A wheezing donkey carried a ten-year-old
  
 boy at his side. In my sudden presence, his face
 went white. I nodded my head and rode past.
  
                    •
  
 I had a vision of Bandinelli surrounded
 by the heaped-up works of his hand.
  
 Not one thing that he had made
  
 did I want to have made.
 From somewhere within his body
  
 like a thread
  
 he spun the piles surrounding him. Then he
 tried to pull away, to release the thread; I saw
  
 the thread was a leash.
  
 He tried and tried to cut it.
 At this, in my vision I said out-loud: —
  
 My art is my revenge.
  
                    •
  
 When I returned to Florence from Fiesole, after
 three days news was brought to me that my little boy
  
 was smothered by his wet-nurse
  
 turning over on him as they both slept.
 His panic, as I left; his arms raised, in panic.
  
                    •
  
 from the great unchosen narration you will soon
 be released
  
 Benvenuto Cellini
  
 dirtied by blood and earth
 but now
  
 you have again taught yourself to disappear
  
 moving wax from arm
 to thigh
  
 you have again taught yourself to disappear
  
 here where each soul is its
 orbit spinning
  
 sweetly around the center of itself
  
 at the edge of its eye the great
 design of virtue
  
 here your Medusa and your Perseus are twins
  
 his triumphant body still furious with purpose
 but his face abstracted absorbed in
  
 contemplation as she is
  
 abstracted absorbed
 though blood still spurts from her neck
  
 defeated by a mirror
  
 as in concentration you move wax
 from thigh to arm
  
 under your hand it grows
  
                    •
  
 The idyll began when the Duke reached me a goldsmith’s
 hammer, with which I struck the goldsmith’s
  
 chisel he held; and so the little statues were
  
 disengaged from earth and rust. Bronze
 antiquities, newly found near Arezzo, they lacked
  
 either head or hands or feet. Impatient for my
  
 presence, the Duke insisted that I join him each evening
 at his new pastime, playing artisan — leaving orders
  
 for my free admittance to his rooms, day or night.
  
 His four boys, when the Duke’s eyes were turned,
 hovered around me, teasing. One night
  
 I begged them to hold their peace.
  
 The boldest replied, That we can’t do! I said
 what one cannot do is required of no one.
  
 So have your will! Faced with their sons’
  
 delight in this new principle, the Duke and Duchess
 smiling accused me of a taste for chaos . . . 
  
 At last the four figures wrought for the four
  
 facets of the pedestal beneath Perseus
 were finished. I brought them one evening to the Duke,
  
 arranging them on his worktable in a row: —
  
 figures, postures from scenes that the eye cannot
 entirely decipher, story haunting the eye with its
  
 resonance, unseen ground that explains nothing . . . 
  
 The Duke appeared, then immediately
 retreated; reappearing, in his right hand
  
 he held a pear slip. This is for your garden, the garden of
  
 your house. I began, Do you mean, but he cut me off
 saying, Yes, Benvenuto: garden and house now are yours.
  
 Thus I received what earlier was only lent me.
  
 I thanked him and his Duchess; then both
 took seats before my figures.
  
 For two hours talk was of their beauty, —
  
 the Duchess insisted they were too exquisite
 to be wasted down there
  
 in the piazza; I must place them in her apartments.
  
 No argument from intention or design
 unconvinced her.
  
 So I waited till the next day — entering the private
  
 chambers at the hour the Duke and Duchess
 each afternoon went riding, I carried the statues
  
 down and soldered them with lead into their niches.
  
 Returning, how angry the Duchess became! The Duke
 abandoned his workshop. I went there no more.
  
                    •
  
 The old inertia of earth that hates the new
 (as from a rim I watched)
  
 rose from the ground, legion: —
  
 truceless ministers of the great unerasable
 ZERO, eager to annihilate lineament and light,
  
 waited, pent, against the horizon: —
  
 some great force (massive, stubborn, multiform as
 earth, fury whose single name is LEGION, — )
  
 wanted my Perseus not to exist: —
  
 and I must
 defeat them.
  
 Then my trembling assistants woke me.
  
 They said all my work
 was spoiled.
  
 Perseus was spoiled. He lay buried in earth
  
 wreathed in fragile earthenware veins from the furnace
 above, veins through which he still
  
 waited to be filled with burning metal.
  
 The metal was curdled. As I slept, sick,
 the bronze had been allowed to cake, to curdle.
  
 Feverish, made sick by my exertions for
  
 days, for months, I slept; while those charged
 with evenly feeding the furnace that I had so well
  
 prepared, LARKED —
  
 I thought, Unwitting ministers of the gorgon
 Medusa herself. The furnace choked with caking, curdling
  
 metal that no art known to man could
  
 uncurdle, must be utterly dismantled — all
 who made it agreed this must destroy
  
 the fragile, thirsty mould of Perseus beneath.
  
 But Perseus was not more strong
 than Medusa, but more clever: — if he ever
  
 was to exist as idea, he must first exist as matter: —
  
 all my old inborn
 daring returned,
  
 furious to reverse
  
 the unjust triumphs of the world’s mere
 arrangements of power, that seemingly on earth
  
 cannot be reversed. First, I surveyed my forces: —
  
 seven guilty workmen, timid, sullen,
 resentful; a groom; two maids; a cook.
  
 I harassed these skeptical troops into battle: —
  
 two hands were sent to fetch from the butcher
 Capretta a load of young oak, —
  
 in bronze furnaces the only woods you use
  
 are slow-burning alder, willow, pine: now I needed
 oak and its fierce heat. As the oak
  
 was fed log by log into the fire, how the cake began
  
 to stir, to glow and sparkle. Now
 from the increased
  
 combustion of the furnace, a conflagration
  
 shot up from the roof: two windows
 burst into flame: I saw the violent storm
  
 filling the sky fan the flames.
  
 All the while with pokers and iron rods
 we stirred and stirred the channels—
  
 the metal, bubbling, refused to flow.
  
 I sent for all my pewter plates, dishes, porringers —
 the cook and maids brought some two hundred.
  
 Piece by piece, I had them thrown
  
 into the turgid mass. As I watched the metal for
 movement, the cap of the furnace
  
 exploded — bronze welling over on all sides.
  
 I had the plugs pulled, the mouths of the mould
 opened; in perfect liquefaction
  
 the veins of Perseus filled . . .
  
 Days later, when the bronze had cooled, when the clay
 sheath had been with great care removed, I found
  
 what was dead brought to life again.
  
                    •
  
 Now, my second
 prison. It began soon after Perseus was unveiled
  
 to acclaim — great acclaim. Perhaps I grew
  
 too glorious. Perseus, whose birth consumed
 nine years, found stuck to his pedestal
  
 sonnets celebrating the master’s hand that made him . . .
  
 On the day of unveiling, Duke Cosimo stationed himself
 at a window just above the entrance to the palace;
  
 there, half-hidden, he listened for hours to the crowd’s
  
 wonder. He sent his attendant Sforza to say
 my reward 
  
 soon would astonish me.
  
 Ten days passed. At last Sforza appeared and asked
 what price I placed on my statue.
  
 I was indeed astonished: It is not my custom,
  
 I replied, to set a price for my work, as if
 he were a merchant and I a mere tradesman.
  
 Then, at risk of the Duke’s severe displeasure, I was
  
 warned I must set a price: infuriated, I said
 ten thousand golden crowns.
  
 Cities and great palaces are built with ten thousand
  
 golden crowns, the Duke
 two days later flung at me in anger.
  
 Many men can build cities and palaces,
  
 I replied, but not one can make
 a second Perseus.
  
 Bandinelli, consulted by the Duke, reluctantly
  
 concluded that the statue was worth
 sixteen thousand.
  
 The Duke replied that for two farthings
  
 Perseus could go to the scrap heap; that would
 resolve our differences.
  
 At last, the settlement was thirty-five hundred, one
  
 hundred a month. Soon after, charges were brought
 against me, for sodomy —
  
 I escaped Florence as far as Scarperia, but there
  
 the Duke’s soldiers caught me and in chains
 brought me back.
  
 I confessed. If I had not, I could have been made
  
 to serve as a slave in the Duke’s galleys for life.
 The Duke listened behind a screen as I was made
  
 publicly to confess, in full court . . . Punishment
  
 was four years imprisonment. Without the Duke’s
 concurrence, of course, no charges could have been
  
 lodged, no public humiliation arranged
  
 to silence the insolent. The first Cosimo, founder of Medici
 power, all his life protected Donatello — whose
  
 affections and bliss were found in Ganymede.
  
 After imprisonment one month, Cosimo
 finally commuted my sentence to house arrest.
  
 There his magnanimity allowed me to complete
  
 my Christ of the whitest marble
 set upon a cross of the blackest.
  
 Now, my Christ sits still packed in a crate
  
 in the Duke’s new chapel; my bust of the Duke
 is exiled to Elba, there to frighten in open air
  
 slaves peering out from his passing galleys.
  
 Now, after the Duchess and two of their sons
 died of fever within two months, Cosimo
  
 grows stranger: he murdered Sforza
  
 by running him through with a spear: —
 he does not own
  
 his mind; or will.
  
 When I ask release from his service, he says
 that he cannot, that he soon
  
 will have need of me for great projects; no
  
 commissions come. Catherine de’ Medici, regent of
 the young French king, petitioned that I be allowed
  
 to enter her service. He said I had no will now to work.
  
 In prison I wrote my sonnet addressed
 to Fortune: — Fortune,  you sow!
  
 You turned from me because Ganymede
  
 also is my joy . . . O God of Nature, author
 of my nature,
  
 where does your son Jesus forbid it?
  
 When I was five, one night my father
 woke me. He pulled me to the basement, making me
  
 stare into the oak fire and see what he just had seen.
  
 There a little lizard was sporting
 at the core of the intensest flames.
  
 My father boxed me on the ears, then kissed me —
  
 saying that I must remember this night: —
 My dear little boy, the lizard you see
  
 is a salamander, a creature that lives
  
 at the heart of fire. You and I are blessed: no other
 soul now living has been allowed to see it.
  
                    •
  
 I am too old to fight to leave Florence: —
  
 here, young, this goldsmith and jeweler
 began to imagine that
  
 severity, that chastity of style
  
 certain remnants of the ancient world
 left my hand hungry to emulate: —
  
 equilibrium of ferocious, contradictory
  
 forces: equilibrium whose balance or poise is their
 tension, and does not efface them, —
  
 as if the surface of each thing
  
 arranged within the frame, the surface of each
 body the eye must circle
  
 gives up to the eye its vibration, its nature.
  
 Two or three times, perhaps,— you
 say where, — I have achieved it.
  
                    •
  
 See, in my great bronze bust of the great
 Duke, embedded in the right epaulette like a trophy
 an open-mouthed
 face part lion part man part goat, with an iron
 bar jammed in its lower jaw
  
 rising resistlessly across its mouth.
  
 See, in Vasari’s clumsy portrait of me, as I float
 above the right shoulder of the Duke, the same face.”
  
                    •
  
 As if your hand fumbling to reach inside
 reached inside
  
 As if light falling on the surface
 fell on what made the surface
  
 As if there were no scarcity of sun
 on the sun
  
  
  
                               III
  
 I covered my arm with orchid juice.
  
 With my hatchet I split a mangrove stick
 from a tree, and sharpened it.
  
 I covered the killing stick with orchid juice.
  
 We were camping at Marunga Island
 looking for oysters. This woman I was about to kill
  
 at last separated herself from the others
  
 to hunt lilies. She walked into the swamp, then
 got cold, and lay down on sandy ground.
  
 After I hit her between the eyes with my hatchet
  
 she kicked, but couldn’t
 raise up.
  
 With my thumb over the end of the killing stick
  
 I jabbed her Mount of Venus until her skin pushed
 back up to her navel. Her large intestine
  
 protruded as though it were red calico.
  
 With my thumb over the end of the killing stick
 each time she inhaled
  
 I pushed my arm
  
 in a little. When she exhaled, I stopped. Little by little
 I got my hand
  
 inside her. Finally I touched her heart.
  
 Once you reach what is
 inside it is outside. I pushed the killing stick
  
 into her heart.
  
 The spirit that belonged to that dead woman
 went into my heart then.
  
 I felt it go in.
  
 I pulled my arm
 out. I covered my arm with orchid juice.
  
 Next I broke a nest of green ants
  
 off a tree, and watched the live ants
 bite her skin until her skin moved by itself
  
 downward from her navel and covered her bones.
  
 Then I took some dry mud and put my sweat
 and her blood in the dry mud
  
 and warmed it over a fire. Six or eight times
  
 I put the blood and sweat and mud
 inside her uterus until there was no trace of her
  
 wound or what I had done.
  
 I was careful none of her pubic hair was left
 inside her vagina for her husband to feel.
  
 Her large intestine stuck out several feet.
  
 When I shook some green ants on it, a little
 went in. I shook some more. All of it went in.
  
 When I whirled the killing stick with her heart’s blood
  
 over her head, her head
 moved. When I whirled it some more, she moved
  
 more. The third time I whirled the killing stick
  
 she gasped for breath. She blew some breath
 out of her mouth, and was all right.
  
 I said, You go eat some lilies. She
  
 got up. I said, You will live
 two days. One day you will be happy. The next, sick.
  
 She ate some lilies. She walked around, then
  
 came back and slept. When laughing and talking women
 woke her she gathered her lilies and returned to camp.
  
 The next day she walked around and played,
  
 talked and made fun, gathering with others oysters
 and lilies. She brought into camp what she
  
 gathered. That night she lay down and died.
  
 Even the gods cannot
 end death. In this universe anybody can kill anybody
  
 with a stick. What the gods gave me
  
 is their gift, the power to bury within each
 creature the hour it ceases.
  
 Everyone knows I have powers but not such power.
  
 If they knew I would be so famous
 they would kill me.
  
 I tell you because your tongue is stone.
  
 If the gods ever give you words, one night in
 sleep you will wake to find me above you.
  
                    •
  
 After sex & metaphysics, —
 . . . what?
  
 What you have made.
  
                    •
  
 Infinite the forms, finite
 tonight as I find again in the mirror the familiar appeaseless
  
 eater’s face
  
 Ignorant of cause or source or end
 in silence he repeats
  
 Eater, become food
  
 All life exists at the expense of other life
 Because you have eaten and eat as eat you must
  
 Eater, become food
  
 unlike the burning stars
 burning merely to be
  
 Then I ask him how to become food
  
 In silence he repeats that others have
 other fates, but that I must fashion out of the corruptible
  
 body a new body good to eat a thousand years
  
 Then I tell the eater’s face that within me is no
 sustenance, on my famished
  
 plate centuries have been served me and still I am famished
  
 He smirks, and in silence repeats that all life exists
 at the expense of other life
  
 You must fashion out of the corruptible
 body a new body good to eat a thousand years
  
 Because you have eaten and eat as eat you must
 ignorant of cause or source or end
  
                    •
  
 drugged to sleep by repetition of the diurnal
 round, the monotonous sorrow of the finite,
  
 within       I am awake
  
 repairing in dirt the frayed immaculate thread
 forced by being to watch the birth of suns
  
                    •
  
 This is the end of the third hour of the night.





subjects : Living, Health & Illness, Relationships, Birth & Birthdays, Family & Ancestors, Nature, The Body