title : Nabokov’s Blues

author : William Matthews

text : 
The wallful of quoted passages from his work,   
with the requisite specimens pinned next 
to their literary cameo appearances, was too good 

a temptation to resist, and if the curator couldn’t,   
why should we? The prose dipped and shimmered   
and the “flies,” as I heard a buff call them, stood 

at lurid attention on their pins. If you love to read   
and look, you could be happy a month in that small   
room. One of the Nabokov photos I’d never seen: 

he’s writing (left-handed! why did I never trouble   
to find out?) at his stand-up desk in the hotel   
apartment in Montreux. The picture’s mostly 

of his back and the small wedge of face that shows   
brims with indifference to anything not on the page.   
The window’s shut. A tiny lamp trails a veil of light 

over the page, too far away for us to read.   
We also liked the chest of specimen drawers   
labeled, as if for apprentice Freudians, 

“Genitalia,” wherein languished in phials 
the thousands he examined for his monograph   
on the Lycaenidae, the silver-studded Blues. 

And there in the center of the room a carillon 
of Blues rang mutely out. There must have been 
three hundred of them. Amanda’s Blue was there, 

and the Chalk Hill Blue, the Karner Blue 
(Lycaeides melissa samuelis Nabokov),          
a Violet-Tinged Copper, the Mourning Cloak, 

an Echo Azure, the White-Lined Green Hairstreak, 
the Cretan Argus (known only from Mt. Ida: 
in the series Nabokov did on this beauty 

he noted for each specimen the altitude at which   
it had been taken), and as the ads and lovers say,   
“and much, much more.” The stilled belle of the tower 

was a Lycaeides melissa melissa. No doubt 
it’s an accident Melissa rhymes, sort of, with Lolita,          
The scant hour we could lavish on the Blues 

flew by, and we improvised a path through cars 
and slush and boot-high berms of mud-blurred snow   
to wherever we went next. I must have been mute, 

or whatever I said won from silence nothing   
it mourned to lose. I was back in that small   
room, vast by love of each flickering detail, 

each genital dusting to nothing, the turn,   
like a worm’s or caterpillar’s, of each phrase.   
I stood up to my ankles in sludge pooled 

over a stopped sewer grate and thought—   
wouldn’t you know it—about love and art:   
you can be ruined (“rurnt,” as we said in south- 

western Ohio) by a book or improved by   
a butterfly. You can dodder in the slop, 
septic with a rage not for order but for the love 

the senses bear for what they do, for detail 
that’s never annexed, like a reluctant crumb 
to a vacuum cleaner, to a coherence. 

You can be bead after bead on perception’s rosary. 
This is the sweet ache that hurts most, the way 
desire burns bluely at its phosphorescent core: 

just as you’re having what you wanted most,   
you want it more and more until that’s more   
than you, or it, or both of you, can bear. 






subjects : Arts & Sciences, Nature, Love, Relationships, Reading & Books, Animals, Realistic & Complicated