title : Becune Point

author : Derek Walcott

text : 
Stunned heat of noon. In shade, tan, silken cows 
hide in the thorned acacias. A butterfly staggers. 
      
Stamping their hooves from thirst, small horses drowse 
or whinny for water. On parched, ochre headlands, daggers 

of agave bristle in primordial defense, 
like a cornered monster backed up against the sea. 

A mongoose charges dry grass and fades through a fence 
faster than an afterthought. Dust rises easily. 

Haze of the Harmattan, Sahara dust, memory’s haze 
from the dried well of Africa, the headland’s desert 

or riders in swirling burnooses, mixed with the greys 
of hills veiled in Impressionist light. We inherit 
    
two worlds of associations, or references, drought 
that we heighten into Delacroix’s North Africa, 

veils, daggers, lances, herds the Harmattan brought 
with a phantom inheritance, which the desperate seeker 

of a well-spring staggers in the heat in search of— 
heroic ancestors; the other that the dry season brings 

is the gust of a European calendar, but it is the one love 
that thirsts for confirmations in the circling rings 

of the ground dove’s cooing on stones, in the acacia’s 
thorns and the agave’s daggers, that they are all ours, 

the white horsemen of the Sahara, India’s and Asia’s 
plumed mongoose and crested palmtree, Benin and Pontoise. 

We are history’s afterthought, as the mongoose races 
ahead of its time; in drought we discover our shadows, 

our origins that range from the most disparate places, 
from the dugouts of Guinea to the Nile’s canted dhows. 


                                     II 

The incredible blue with its bird-inviting cloud, 
in which there are crumbling towers, banners and domes, 

and the sliding Carthage of sunsets, the marble shroud 
drawn over associations that are Greece’s and Rome’s 

and rarely of Africa. They continue at sixty-seven 
to echo in the corridors of the head, perspectives 

of a corridor in the Vatican that led, not to heaven, 
but to more paintings of heaven, ideas in lifted sieves 

drained by satiety because great art can exhaust us, 
and even the steadiest faith can be clogged by excess, 

the self-assured Christs, the Madonnas’ inflexible postures 
without the mess of motherhood. With this blue I bless 

emptiness where these hills are barren of tributes 
and the repetitions of power, our sky’s naive 

ceiling without domes and spires, an earth whose roots 
like the thorned acacia’s deepen my belief.




subjects : Pets, Relationships, Religion, Nature, Christianity, Landscapes & Pastorals