title : A Happy Childhood

author : William Matthews

text : 
Babies do not want to hear about babies; they like to be told of giants and castles.  Dr. Johnson  No one keeps a secret so well as a child  Victor Hugo
My mother stands at the screen door, laughing.   
“Out out damn Spot,” she commands our silly dog.   
I wonder what this means. I rise into adult air 

like a hollyhock, I’m so proud to be loved   
like this. The air is tight to my nervous body. 
I use new clothes and shoes the way the corn-studded   

soil around here uses nitrogen, giddily. 
Ohio, Ohio, Ohio. Often I sing 
to myself all day like a fieldful of August   

insects, just things I whisper, really, 
a trance in sneakers. I’m learning 
to read from my mother and soon I’ll go to school, 

I hate it when anyone dies or leaves and the air                   
goes slack around my body and I have to hug myself, 
a cloud, an imaginary friend, the stream in the road- 

side park. I love to be called for dinner.   
Spot goes out and I go in and the lights 
in the kitchen go on and the dark, 

which also has a body like a cloud’s, 
leans lightly against the house. Tomorrow 
I’ll find the sweatstains it left, little grey smudges. 

.       .       . 

       Here’s a sky no higher than a streetlamp, 
and a stack of morning papers cinched by wire.   
It’s 4:00 A.M. A stout dog, vaguely beagle,   

minces over the dry, fresh-fallen snow; 
and here’s our sleep-sodden paperboy   
with his pliers, his bike, his matronly dog,   

his unclouding face set for paper route 
like an alarm clock. Here’s a memory 
in the making, for this could be the morning   

he doesn’t come home and his parents   
two hours later drive his route until 
they find him asleep, propped against a streetlamp, 

his papers all delivered and his dirty paper- 
satchel slack, like an emptied lung, 
and he blur-faced and iconic in the morning 

air rinsing itself a paler and paler blue 
through which a last few dandruff-flecks   
of snow meander casually down.   

The dog squeaks in out of the dark, 
snuffling me too me too. And here he goes   
home to memory, and to hot chocolate 

on which no crinkled skin forms like infant ice, 
and to the long and ordinary day, 
school, two triumphs and one severe 

humiliation on the playground, the past 
already growing its scabs, the busride home, 
dinner, and evening leading to sleep 

like the slide that will spill him out, come June,   
into the eye-reddening chlorine waters   
of the municipal pool. Here he goes to bed. 

Kiss. Kiss. Teeth. Prayers. Dark. Dark.   
Here the dog lies down by his bed,   
and sighs and farts. Will he always be 

this skinny, chicken-bones?   
He’ll remember like a prayer 
how his mother made breakfast for him 

every morning before he trudged out   
to snip the papers free. Just as   
his mother will remember she felt 

guilty never to wake up with him   
to give him breakfast. It was Cream 
of Wheat they always or never had together. 


It turns out you are the story of your childhood   
and you’re under constant revision,   
like a lonely folktale whose invisible folks 

are all the selves you’ve been, lifelong,   
shadows in fog, grey glimmers at dusk.   
And each of these selves had a childhood 

it traded for love and grudged to give away,   
now lost irretrievably, in storage   
like a set of dishes from which no food, 

no Cream of Wheat, no rabbit in mustard   
sauce, nor even a single raspberry,   
can be eaten until the afterlife, 

which is only childhood in its last   
disguise, all radiance or all humiliation,   
and so it is forfeit a final time. 

In fact it was awful, you think, or why   
should the piecework of grief be endless?   
Only because death is, and likewise loss, 

which is not awful, but only breathtaking.   
There’s no truth about your childhood,   
though there’s a story, yours to tend, 

like a fire or garden. Make it a good one,   
since you’ll have to live it out, and all 
its revisions, so long as you all shall live, 

for they shall be gathered to your deathbed,   
and they’ll have known to what you and they 
would come, and this one time they’ll weep for you. 


The map in the shopping center has an X 
signed “you are here.” A dream is like that.   
In a dream you are never eighty, though   

you may risk death by other means: 
you’re on a ledge and memory calls you   
to jump, but a deft cop talks you in 

to a small, bright room, and snickers. 
And in a dream, you’re everyone somewhat,   
but not wholly. I think I know how that 

works: for twenty-one years I had a father   
and then I became a father, replacing him   
but not really. Soon my sons will be fathers. 

Surely, that’s what middle-aged means,   
being father and son to sons and father.   
That a male has only one mother is another 

story, told wherever men weep wholly.   
Though nobody’s replaced. In one dream   
I’m leading a rope of children to safety, 

through a snowy farm. The farmer comes out   
and I have to throw snowballs well to him   
so we may pass. Even dreaming, I know 

he’s my father, at ease in his catcher’s   
squat, and that the dream has revived   
to us both an old unspoken fantasy: 

we’re a battery. I’m young, I’m brash,   
I don’t know how to pitch but I can   
throw a lamb chop past a wolf. And he 

can handle pitchers and control a game.   
I look to him for a sign. I’d nod 
for anything. The damn thing is hard to grip 

without seams, and I don’t rely only 
on my live, young arm, but throw by all   
the body I can get behind it, and it fluffs 

toward him no faster than the snow   
in the dream drifts down. Nothing 
takes forever, but I know what the phrase 

means. The children grow more cold   
and hungry and cruel to each other 
the longer the ball’s in the air, and it begins 

to melt. By the time it gets to him we’ll be   
our waking ages, and each of us is himself   
alone, and we all join hands and go. 

.       .       . 

       Toward dawn, rain explodes on the tin roof   
like popcorn. The pale light is streaked by grey 
and that green you see just under the surface 

of water, a shimmer more than a color.   
Time to dive back into sleep, as if into   
happiness, that neglected discipline .... 

In those sixth-grade book reports 
you had to say if the book was optimistic   
or not, and everyone looked at you 

the same way: how would he turn out?   
He rolls in his sleep like an otter.   
Uncle Ed has a neck so fat it’s funny, 

and on the way to work he pries the cap 
off a Pepsi. Damn rain didn’t cool one weary   
thing for long; it’s gonna be a cooker. 

The boy sleeps with a thin chain of sweat   
on his upper lip, as if waking itself,   
becoming explicit, were hard work. 

Who knows if he’s happy or not?   
A child is all the tools a child has,   
growing up, who makes what he can.




subjects : Family & Ancestors, Youth, Life Choices, Growing Old, Home Life, Living, Relationships