title : Dejection

author : David Baker

text : 
The sun is warm, the sky is clear,   
      etc.... Quickly he taps 
   a full nib twice to the mouth of 
      his japan-ink bowl—harder than 
      he had thought, if he had thought—smears   
   the fine spattering with his sleeve, 
      and continues, for whom haste is   
   more purity than certainty, 
as anarchy is better than despotism— 

   for this reason—that the former 
      is for a season & that the 
   latter is eternal. These days 
      have been quickened with sightseeing,   
      Mary and Claire at Virgil’s tomb, 
   the Bay of Baiae, until poor health 
      overtakes Shelley descending 
      Vesuvius by torch light, who 
collapses with agonizing pain in his side. 

   Now his chamber is rebellion 
      enough. He bears down, scratching lines   
   on the back of the stanzas he 
      will later discard: “My head is wild   
      with weeping!” Famous among friends 
   for his sloth, as for his passions, 
      he once lived in a room described 
   by Mr. Thomas Jefferson 
Hogg, thus: Books, boots, papers, shoes, philosophical 

   instruments, clothes, pistols, linen,   
      crockery, ammunition, and 
   phials innumerable, with 
      money, stockings, prints, crucibles,   
      bags, and boxes in every place ...   
   The tables, and especially 
      the carpets, were already stained   
   with large spots of various hues, 
which frequently proclaimed the agency of fire. 

   Alas! I have not hope nor health,   
      Nor peace within, etc.... 
  We lived in utter solitude, 
      Mary writes in her journal of 
      the days. Still, Pompeii staggers him,   
   and its distant, deep peals rattle 
      like subterranean thunder   
   beneath the family’s lodging rooms. 
The lightning of the noontide ocean is flashing 

   around me, etc.... How 
      might Prometheus consider 
   these ruins, surrounding, the rooms 
      a shamble, and the posthumous 
      greatness of the Greeks more theory   
   than presence? Yet theories abound.   
      For all their visionary zeal, 
   the pamphlets and tracts, sheer brilliance   
of his Defence, and hope, he is characterized 

   more seditious than inspiring. 
      John Coleridge, Samuel’s nephew:   
   Mr Shelley would abrogate 
      our laws—this would put an end to   
      felonies and misdemenours ... 
   he would abolish the rights of 
      property, he would overthrow 
   the constitution ... no army 
or navy; he would pull down our churches, level 

   the Establishment. This is at 
      least intelligible; but it 
   is not so easy to describe 
      the structure, which Mr Shelley 
      would build upon this vast heap of   
   ruins. ‘Love’, he says, ‘is the sole law 
      which shall govern the moral world’.   
   The great gift, foresight, produces 
foes instead of a god. His fingers blaze with ink. 

   For I am one whom men love not,   
      etc.... His friend Southey: 
   With all his genius, he was a 
      base, bad man. Carlyle is plainer: 
      He is a poor, thin, spasmodic, 
   hectic, shrill, and pallid being. 
      Tomorrow will bring a tour of 
   Naples, and better spirits, and 
peace with Mary and Claire. He is just twenty-six— 

   all his life lies ahead. The bay 
      burns wild beyond his window   
   in holy admixtures of fire 
      and water ... the grand effusion   
      symbolic but real to him 
   as well. The boats are running far 
      and fast. He wonders whether he   
   might take time to charter one, sail 
the Elysian Fields, the Caverns of the Sibyl ... 

   He fills his pen. He must hurry. 
      The fires of new thought swell in his   
   hand like a torch. Tomorrow, 
      the sea, into which he will peer 
      —so translucent that you could see   
   the hollow caverns clothed with the 
      glaucous sea-moss, & the leaves, &   
   branches of those delicate weeds 
that pave the unequal bottom of the water.




subjects : Reading & Books, Arts & Sciences, Poetry & Poets, Travels & Journeys, Activities, Social Commentaries, History & Politics, Living, Crime & Punishment, Money & Economics, Death