title : My Old Idols

author : J. D. McClatchy

text : 
I. AT TEN

   1955. A scratchy waltz
   Buzzed over the ice rink’s P.A.
   My classmate Tony, the barber’s son: “Alls
   He wantsa do is, you know, like, play.”

   Bored with perfecting my languid figure eights,
   I trailed him to a basement door marked GENTS
   With its metal silhouette of high-laced skates
   (Symbols, I guess, of methods desire invents).

   Tony’s older brother was waiting inside.
   I’d been “requested,” it seemed. He was sixteen,
   Tall, rawboned, blue-eyed,
   Thumbs hooked into faded, tightening jeans.

   I fumbled with small talk, pretending to be shy.
   Looking past me, he slowly unzipped his fly.
 
 
II. CALLAS

   Her voice: steeped in a rancid syrupy phlegm:
   Whatever’s not believed remains a grace
   While again she invokes the power that yields:
   Splintered timber and quick consuming flame:
   The simplest way to take hold of the heart’s
   Complications, its pool of spilt religion:
   A long black hair sweat-stuck to the skin:
   The bitter sleep of the dying: the Jew in Berlin:
   Who sent you here? the sharp blade pleads:
   Stormcloud: thornhedge: starchill:
   Blood bubble floating to the top of the glass:
   The light, from fleshrise to soulset:
   The world dragging the slow weight of its shame
   Like the train of pomp: guttering candle: her voice.
 

III. IN CLASS

   Parasangs, satraps, the daily drill . . .
   Beginner’s Greek its own touchstone.
   The sophomore teacher was Father Moan,
   Whom I longed to have praise my skill.
   The illustrated reader’s best
   Accounts of murder and sacrifice
   Only suggested the heavy price
   I longed to pay at his behest.

   He’d slap the pointer against his thigh.
   I quivered. What coldness may construe
   Of devotion was an experience
   As hard to learn as catch his eye.
   I kept my hand up. Here! I knew
   The right answer. The case. The tense.




subjects : Coming of Age, Love, Desire, First Love, Unrequited Love