title : Poem (To be read with Philip Glass’s String Quartet No. 5)

author : Matthea Harvey

text : 
    

Inside the bell jar of the glass factory, 
the girls bend over conveyor belts, lean 
into kilns, bobbing like birds diving for fish. 
One taps a finished porthole window 
with a small silver hammer and 
pronounces it sound (outside
a woodpecker smashes its beak 
into a whitebirch, searching for sap). 
One girl runs her finger down the seam
of a serving plate (outside floodwater
makes a mirror of the meadow). 
Another girl holds a thermometer 
up to the light (the sun has inched up
a few degrees and yes, Monday has a fever). 
Another dips her finger into 
a beaker of water and tests 
that each goblet in the set sings 
a successive note in an E minor scale—
six notes the other girls know so well
that at night, in the dormitory, 
one or all of them can be heard 
hum-dreaming the song in their sleep. 





Since they’re not allowed outside—
never have been, never will be—
they used to watch rainstorms 
like television, cross-legged, wiping 
the glass if their breath fogged 
the view. They used to exclaim
over drops of dew. They used to 
run their fingers along the walls, 
searching for a way out, but that only 
smeared the sky. At break they lie 
on their stomachs in the sunroom, 
where they’ve stacked a wall of cracked
glass hands. Looking through it is the closest
they come to touching the things they see—
the horizon a lifeline across one palm, 
the pine trees in the distance like 
bonsai in tiny finger terrariums. 
Moving things—foxes and half-moons—
slink in and out of adjacent wrists,
slide under successive glass fingernails.
Once a stag walked past and scraped
its antlers along the glass wall. 
They all gasped. It was the closest
they had ever come to another body. 





Now as if their skull walls had 
windows and each brain were 
a clear, crystalline thing, the synapses 
making temporary chandeliers 
of thought-sparks in the brain’s 
blank sky, they are all having 
the same idea at the same time—
to make a girl out of glass.  
The sketches start out simple, but soon 
one girl proposes a glass voicebox 
strung with glass chimes, another petitions 
for porthole pupils, a fringe of glass 
lashes on each eyelid’s hinge, another 
imagines a mouth made of powdered 
glass and crinkle enamel, and off they go. 
Not one finger here has ever felt fur,
seen veins or bones except under 
the cover of skin, but they bypass 
all that with the force of their dreaming—
how best to make her glass hair seem to 
stream down her back, whose forefinger 
they should choose to dent in her dimples. 




 
The thermometer hits one thousand
degrees and suddenly she’s standing there—
hot, glowing, almost still liquid. Like them, 
but unlike too. They don’t question that 
she is alive, walking, gesturing. But no one
imagined that she, with her new glass eyes
would be able to see the glass lock
and the glass key. In an instant, she opens
the door and they stream outside into 
the solid world. This isn’t at all what 
they imagined. The sky is like lead 
above their heads. The once-silent birds
flood their ears with clashing arias. 
All the puddles on the path are blurred
with mud. The glass girl disappears 
and they don’t go after her. When they finally
reach the forest—it is miles further
than they imagined—the air inside is hazy
with dust and spores. They can’t see much
beyond their fingers. A bear or maybe 
a deer thuds by. When they come upon 
a stream, for a moment they brighten:
the light prances on its surface like the prisms
they make in the factory, but they can’t 
see through to the fish, or the shadows
of fish flitting along the river floor. 





Weeks later, they are back in the factory, 
busily pouring bright liquids from 
one beaker to another, sliding barefoot
between kiln, conveyor belt, workshop. 
Then sleep. In her dreams, the girl who 
has begun building a glass owl 
from the inside-out, starting with 
its morning meal of mouse, will invent
a formula for flight. Another is designing
a glass ladder where each rung has 
a different horizon hidden inside. 
The glass girl could be anywhere. 
She could be just outside, watching
or she could be worlds away, and truly, 
they like it that way. In the hot afternoon, 
the girls melt into various poses by 
the glass walls, molding their memories 
of the outside world into newer, clearer forms. 
One taps a finished porthole window 
with a small silver hammer and pronounces it 
sound. One runs her finger down the seam 
of a serving plate. Another holds a thermometer 
horizontally, and uses its markings to measure 
the height of the trees. The mercury inside 
shivers in the newly imagined breeze. 







subjects : Living, The Body, The Mind, Activities, Jobs & Working, Nature, Landscapes & Pastorals, Social Commentaries, Gender & Sexuality