title : from The Poet Writes The Poem That Will Certainly Make Him Famous

author : Douglas Kearney

text : 

                                       0.
 the first line? “blackface is sometimes the truth.”
 the poet knows this will make fire.
  
 ponders performing in some dark room, squinting at the black type—
 red gel spots like laser sights from a rifle big as a bus.
 
but here, the sniper stirs herbal tea, has a cell phone,
the number of a woman the color of thrush wings.
  
 for now: the sniper with the cell phone will be he.
 
 he misses the next line beneath the spoon clanging in the mug
 like the clapper in a schooner’s alarm bell. the third line,
  
 perhaps: “. . . the smoldering cork testifies . . .” or “. . . the moldy corpse
   terrifies . . .”
 he considers each. and wonders about the second line
  
—then about the girl he saw boarding the bus,
 what her name sounds like whispered in a dim room
  
 of red candles, a radio where the poet is. “—ncing and bucking.
 and the yes and suh . . .”—he misses something else,
  
 the new line of little to do with corks or corpses—courts, maybe—
 and what’s “. . . un a gold coin promise, layaway heaven with teeth and
   silence . . .”?
  
 he is lost between a poem, a cell and a thrush’s wing.
  
 so by this time the poet should probably place a refrain
 as this is going to be a long poem, long enough to make the poet famous.
 
 
                                       1.
 blackface is sometimes the truth
 but with added emphasis. a boldface where
 the smoldering cork testifies.
 
                                  [the issue is intent, nahmean?
                                    like what is nahmean when you see
                                   knows its way around the alleys
                                   of the tongue? what is nahmean, nahmean?
                                   and the intent is the issue, you see?] [nahmean?]
 
 blackface is sometimes a lie
 but with added detail. a bold face where
 the smoldering cork testifies.
 
 
                                       2.
but to what? the sawdust packed pockets, the brogan’s salty shadow?
to the straps? scraps off the hips of tin platters?
 
the train’s constant is a-comin? the minister’s constant that Someday
what is the cork, still smelling of cheap wine, some doe-
 
eyed muscatel, a poor man’s dream-color of velvet, some sap
fresh from a cicada tableau to a night club in a Sunday suit,
 
cardboard under his left sock, the bootblack ache slithering out
above his ass, the bootblack cash kissed in waxy fingerprints
 
offered up, offered up to the waitress who won’t smile for a “what this get?”
the bottle brought back, armpit warm? this cork, tossed to the floor
 
and kicked, a careless jig swung by a white chick, and rolled below
a table awaiting some jittering negro, whose gig it is to eyeball
 
these corks, to swoop down, hands a pair of crows, to swoop up
the cork, bear it backstage, to pull it from his pocket like a magician’s dove,
 
transform it into smoke and ovation.
 
what does this testify?
 
what is this truth?
 
why speak of the fire, the first kiss of flame to the cork?
 
watch Bamboozled. that’s all I did.
 
what does this testify?
 
 
                                       3.
what is truth?
again reading
some magazine,
 
again waiting
for the dressing room
door to open:
 
fire gleaming off the platter
 like a breakfast of stars,
 burning cork
 
from Portugal, and cork
doesn’t sink in rough waters,
 like fine schooners
 
from Portugal, and fire
 splits the blackness of dark
 like the fingers of sailors
 
from Portugal, whose tongues
teach new tongues to the lips
in the darkness of blacks
 
from Africa, and burn
 the sea into their faces
 like smoke in a blue lit
 
dressing room. and I
 close the magazine
 full of rappers swimming
 
in denim, ism smoke
and wait for the door
to open. the embers to ignite
 
 
                                       4.
dancing and bucking
  
 spotlight’s prison-break eye and the sweat that lifts from the skull
 and the pancake sheen allowed for the cameras, the pancake
  
 that will not run, and the clothes that cling to the mouths of wetness
 and the red gels that turn the words into spastic ants holding tiny cue cards!!!!!
  
 but the stomach churn of memorization, no no no, the revisions on the other
 copy in the other notebook in the other room no no no the gimpy music stand
 
tilt, the red eye, the spotlight’s stomach, the prison-break sheen, the ants cling,
 the pancake mouth, the spastic words, the cameras lift, the clothes’ wetness,
 
the skull tilt, churn
                            turn
                                    run
                                             no no
                                                        NO
                                                        DANCE                BUCK
  

                                              *   *   *   *
  
                                           the yes and sir

 the room.
 the books.
 hands telling
 what I know
 to a machine.
 alone. dreaming,
 yes, dreaming
 of pinning myself
 to journals like
 a prized butterfly.
 the ink of my beauty
 fading on the white pages.
 
 
                                       5.
 a rusty bicycle is a copper skeleton against the mattress.
 through the chain link, children kneeling on the concrete
  
 look lined for butchering. chewed sedans bleed into the street,
 into sewer bellies.
  
 I’ve written these images too many times. DC is my ghetto—
 every black poet should have one, as every white poet should have
  
 a movie-house or a lake. white poets have attractions.
  
 black poets should also have grandmothers.
 
 I have grandmothers—one living, one not. neither mopped
 any floor but her own. if I stand on their memories, I am too tall
  
 to be jammed into a tenement. black birds peck at my journals. my fingers
 work grime into Elm Place in LeDroit Park, divine urine from Florida Ave
 
 and goad fiends from T Street’s throat. these are not my muses.
 an adjective. a noun. a simile. “ragged storefronts like beaten wives.”
 
I must imagine what might go on behind bricks, past the railing
 climbing up the stoops like wrought iron centipedes. the windows are open
 
sometimes at night. it was hot,
 one black grandmother had a pool. air conditioning. on days without smog,
 
 you could see the sea or someone riding a horse
past the liquor store. no one needs horses in Altadena. here,
 
horses are diamond necklaces. diamond necklaces that shit in crosswalks.
 in DC there is a different kind of horse, and I need it for poems as I need ink.
 
it is not my muse, nahmean? one black grandmother didn’t sit in
 the back of buses. Raleigh lay before her, already mopped. the crows are waiting
 
at the edge of the page. see, the madhouse that seeped out into NE
before exploding into panhandlers stranded in phantom ants,
 
drifting mothers birthing flying dutchmen, that man who walked
 all the way to 6th Street swinging a golf club like a white woman dancing—
 
these are not my muses.
they aren’t even mirrors.
 
they are cork awaiting flame.
 
                                   blackface

                                                                            IS
 
 
sometimes.





subjects : Arts & Sciences, Poetry & Poets, Social Commentaries, History & Politics, Race & Ethnicity, Cities & Urban Life