title : Poem to the Detroit River

author : Terry Wolverton

text : 
Detroit – where the weak are killed and eaten.     – T-shirt slogan, circa 1990. . . the 33 year old woman . . . leapt to her death . . .from a crowded bridge that . . . connects Detroit . . . with itsfamous island park, Belle Isle. She was trying to escape the300-pound man whose car she had accidentally bumped into.According to police, the man had smashed her car windowswith a tire iron, dragged her from the vehicle – stripping offmost of her clothes in the process – slammed her against thehood of her car and pounded her with his fists. Deletha Word. . . could not swim . . . She jumped into the water 40 feet below.     – James Ricci, Los Angeles Times [August 31, 1995]The road to the afterlife – There was . . . a river that had onlyone bridge across it . . . This bridge was guarded by a dog thatjumped at souls and made many of them fall into the river and drown.    – Bruce G. Trigger, The Huron: Farmers of the North

Not really a river at all,
 but a handshake between two Great
 Lakes, Huron stretching to embrace 
 Erie in its green-gray grasp. You
 stitch the liquid boundary of
 a city dismantling itself,
 bricks unmortared, spires sagging, burnt
 out structures razed to open field.
 Prairies returning here, foxtails
 and chicory, Queen Anne’s lace sways;
 tumbleweeds amble down Woodward
 Avenue, blow past fire hydrants,
 storefronts and rusted Cadillacs.

 You are the mirror into which
 we plunge. Towers of a stillborn
 renaissance bend to admire their
 vacant beauty; automobiles
 built in Mexico catch the chrome
 reflection of your waves. They speed
 across the bridge to the island
 whose willows spill their tears against
 your breast. Darkness closes our eyes;
 the park empties, bridge bears a chain
 of headlights. Perfume of exhaust
 drifts over your blackened currents;
 cars jostle for their place in line.

Not the fist of one man but
the sucker punch of a city
 taking scrappy pride in its bruised
 countenance. One bumper kisses
 another like gunshot; the town
 explodes. You swallow the blood of
 a woman’s shattered cheekbone, pressed
 to metal hood, scorched by engine’s
 heat. Who wanna buy some of dis
 bitch – she got to pay fo’ my car.
 So naked in our headlights. Her
 manicure rakes bridge’s edge – some
 bystanders yell, Jump! – she lets go.
  
 You catch the women who plummet
 from the sky, seeking safety in
 your watery clutches. They root
 inside your skin; lungs swell with your
 essence. Arms wrestle the eddies
 but finally surrender, give
 themselves fully. Guardian dog
 of the bridge leans muzzle over
 the rail, slavering. The whole pack
 looks down, red eyes gleaming. She’s lost
 to us, but we hear her singing
 forever in our dreams, gurgled
 lullaby for this drowned city. 





subjects : Living, Death, Nature, Seas, Rivers, & Streams, Social Commentaries, War & Conflict, Crime & Punishment, Money & Economics, Cities & Urban Life