title : In Eight Parts

author : Paul Killebrew

text : 
i.
    
 I grew up an anxious painting by my dad’s shaking hand.
 In the painting of my dad, a quiet hole beats
 through the dull, black night. I’m heir to an orange heart
 in the rhythmic black where a man leans quietly 
 and wonders. I wonder about my dad, a hole
 in my painting. I used to think my dad was dull,
 but his shaking hand gave rhythm to my body.
 In my dad’s painting, a hole glows orange in the dull night
 where I sit beneath the canvas looking up.
 My dad looks down and laughs.
 When I went into my dad’s painting and saw a man
 lean toward a bright, orange hole, night shook
 through my shirt in an inherited rhythm, duplicating 
 the heart held by his anxious body. My painting 
 a laughing dad. My heart a hole where on a bright,
 orange night, I dropped a tattered shirt, shaking.
  

ii.
    
 My dad said the man was meant
 to be looking at the painting he’s in,
 but it didn’t quite work. And so the hole
 where he’s looking now. The finger-thick lines
 around him don’t hide a failed painting
 or reveal any struggle to mean.
 My dad believes in action and the truth
 of process: a man looks into a hole
 and so he is. He looks past the hole
 to what brought him to it. The tattered
 painting doesn’t work as finger-thick
 evidence of his struggle to mean,
 but the correspondence of his belief 
 shakes through its presence. To believe in holes
 and men looking into them. To lean
 toward action and the presence of process
 where a man looks at the painting he’s in and is.


iii.
  
 A man looks at the hole he’s in and laughs.
 He never thought about what the colors mean,
 the hole bright orange in the black night.
 Like babies painting a painting of babies,
 the man laughs at the hole he’s in and looks down
 to feel his heart beneath a tattered shirt.
 He’s shaking like an old man’s dad.
 Is a man the hole he falls into?
 Colors are the correspondence of babies—
 they lean and fall into the holes we leave them.
 A baby looks at the hole he’s in and laughs.
 He shakes, no colors or dads to hold him still.


iv.  
  
 My dad’s fingers spilled around the surface 
 without distinction, causing the offense                        
 we call process. The painting, having the grace
 of endurance, allows the line its tiny provocation,
 but lacking the confrontation that would compel
 the painting into itself—the man looks down,
 not in; we look at, not through. The painting
 communicates by presence alone, letting us know
 that it’s here without a message, or a message
 embodied in its delivery, a swallowed swallow.
 The man and the hole he looks into are homage
 to us. The man doesn’t have a mouth,
 the hole doesn’t have a shape.
 Our provocation is presence alone. 
  

v.
  
 I used to went into my dad’s painting I grew up In
 When I dull black orange heart wonder about quiet 
 and saw a man      I      my dad      a hole rhythmic wonders
 the painting through the night I’m heir to
 anxious painting     my dad’s painting     My painting
 an inherited rhythm his shaking hand glows
 in my painting      think my dad’s a hole
 beats of my dad where I sit In a orange hole
 black where my night shirt shook a tattered night
 in the canvas      in the dull shirt        and a man leans
 by shaking hand       I dropped a laughing dad
 beneath an orange night     an orange hole
 quietly my dad in duplicating heart
 his anxious dull rhythm     My dad held by body
 was lean down to my body but gave up
 looks and laughs through a bright
 My heart      the looking toward a hole
 shaking on a bright where
    

vi.
  
 doesn’t work     where he’s looking now
 but the painting he's in is presence
 He looks tattered     The man looking so finger-thick
 My dad     The finger-thick lines    the correspondence
 to the painting he’s in     And the hole
 it didn’t quite mean what brought him to it
 evidence of his process reveal the man was meant a hole
 of My action at the dad of any truth
 To mean in looks      and of looks to be
 don’t hide my dad at work     toward his past
 he is the hole the painting believes in
 but shakes around failed action    struggle to lean through
 for process where a man and a struggle and a painting
 as to him     and so To belief      or its presence
 said to believe in holes and men looking into them
  

vii.
  
 the hole looks at A man he’s in and shakes
 Like A baby looks at the correspondence of babies
 and laughs     He bright and orange painting
 never a man he falls into       Colors are of babies
 the colors mean no colors     they lean
 night babies painting a black still hole about dads
 he’s the hole we fall into     the holes in his shaking heart
 in the thought leave them     and down the what hole
 He’s like a tattered shirt      the man laughs at the looks
 he’s an old man’s hole    to feel beneath dad
 or to hold the laughs He Is in him
  
viii.
    
 we call a swallow homage to provocation
 the hole doesn’t have a message
 fingers in its delivery lacking grace
 but the man looks down without endurance
 confrontation embodied    swallowed
 causing the process of presence
 having shape    letting us know that it’s there
 not in    not without a message     a tiny surface
 My dad’s distinction allows The painting its mouth
 spilled The man through The painting
 the line we look at     the painting into
 or around      Our man looks into that
 the offense would he alone have
 The us and the is are
 by presence alone the hole communicates itself
 the provocation doesn’t compel





subjects : Living, Parenthood, Relationships, Family & Ancestors, Arts & Sciences, Painting & Sculpture