title : I Love Country Music

author : Paul Killebrew

text : 
Sometimes we blubbered through the fallout
 of willful confusion in pants that didn’t fit the legs
 we sawed off. We looked at each other and fell
 forward and back, forward and back, a little bit
 like dancing and a little like aggravated assault.
 At times it seemed reasonable because it always
 seems reasonable to accept whatever anxieties
 or losses must accumulate in the face of what
 we really wanted all along. In buildings and on
 streets you could paint a few eyes on a face 
 and see the careless representation of brothers
 and sisters making a family out of paint
 and the gracious mistakes of seeing. Mistakes,
 the essence of sight, could have been all we had 
 to go on anyway, and not for us to leave behind
 what took us through the shower of dumbasses
 with tact and a breath of elegance, even the hope
 that later, when the streets cleared of agitated needlers
 and the AC kicked on for good, we could sleep
 on the clothes spangled outside the closet and find 
 a reason for closing the bedroom door on shadows
 of pedantic radiation from thin margins of lamplight
 always suggesting some other plot in some other bedroom,
 tensions to splay us soon enough. And then it occurred
 to you, or maybe it occurred to me, doesn’t matter, I think
 actually someone called and said that anyone who doesn’t 
 leave something for you isn’t worth having, so maybe
 now's a good time to find a dapper little high school
 where everyone can be a little less civil, and blessed
 with selfishness, we could part the fingers interlocked
 between us, make fists and get busy. Then intensity
 fermented into green books of music, loud country music,
 and I love country music. It rolled around my ears
 in corridors where boredom had once been so irrefutable
 and heavy, and I was happy and dancing and throwing
 punches at pigeons and even hitting a few. But the romantic
 arc never made it over the willful lack of conviction,
 some gap between the faces on the heads we saw
 pass our table in the sour-faced restaurant run by those
 French people, okay a gap between that and the face
 in the dream you had of your father, the one where you said
 he stuffed a billy club down a duck’s throat and called 
 for another shot of Dewar’s. I expected you to take things 
 when you left, but not those things. Light diffuses
 evenly across the kitchen, blood through my body,
 and it’s sort of funny, but our whole thing fits between
 two haircuts, like a roadtrip or something. I feel now
 that I’ve been digested by time, and light would pool
 into terrible reflections of my own back as I backed 
 into a mirror or performed some other forgetful jujitsu,
 an effort to lose thoughts or patterns of thought,
 but the light diffuses and you walk through it,
 collide with little pieces of what ate you, get angry
 and write long letters about how your hand can’t talk,
 how the paper is so light and effortless when you hold it
 how could you even know, you couldn’t even imagine
 holding this light and ridiculous thing that my hand
 brushed over in patterns it will later try to forget.
 Then I taped my mouth shut and tried to whistle.
 Leave me alone. Don’t call. Get lost, dumpster
 of confusion. I know it’s never been that easy,
 that from the eyes in your skull the black plastic bags
 were suffocating the trees even though to me it was
 more like a ballerina’s shadow had escaped and was dancing 
 through the branches frantically with desperate happiness
 and cause for alarm. I guess either way something unsafe
 and ridiculous was happening, and I guess we knew it,
 I think we even talked about it, but I’ve been a little lonely
 since I started writing my dissertation. It’s about class
 consciousness among people who work behind registers.
 And it’s interesting, there’s all kinds of different races
 and classes and income levels represented in the world
 of cashiers, but at the level of values we see predominantly 
 two classes, the complacent and the entitled, though many
 cashiers are some measure of both. The complacent
 are resigned to what they understand to be their position.
 They’re courteous and reliable; class issues only arise
 when people are rude to them, which they tend to handle fine,
 though if they say anything about it afterwards, it tends to be
 a cruel and brief dismissal not only of the occurrence,
 but of the entire offending person. The entitled
 have a very complicated expression of social hierarchy.
 Because they see themselves in transition,
 usually ascending, there’s this idea that their values won’t,
 or can’t, find full expression from their current position 
 and so they don’t feel compelled to act in a way consistent
 with their values, while at the same time they may expect
 to be treated in accordance with those values. When people
 are rude to them, they flip out. Basically today’s been pasted 
 together from the leavings of some green intensity
 and cigarettes crowded at the back of the passive
 classrooms of the skull. Will there be coffee
 on the other side? Will there be ladies to walk up to you
 on a plain old shit-for-brains day and ask you of Washington
 Square Park, “Why is this on the map?” I like it when people
 cock their heads a little when you talk. Seems elegant.
 I tell them I’m not sure, but Henry James wrote something
 complicated about it. Then these nice ladies with a telling lack 
 of accent move along into non-history and the bulk of our hours
 waiting without a mind for restitution. I would surrender
 our moist telephone calls and arthritic tribes of entitlement
 if I knew who to give them up to. I never go anywhere             
 or do anything slow because revision is only a function
 of doubt. Well okay, maybe doubt and shame. Actually,
 it’s just shame. Revision is a function of shame. But enough 
 of these dead people, we must rise like blood in April! Instead
 here I am peeling seconds off the end of my life,
 glass of water, frown on face, notebook open to the parade
 of minutes and obvious as a daisycutter in the desert. 
 No more nights in the kitchen or bowls of macaroni,
 no more misdemeanors with the microwave or blue orbs
 whistling into my ear, no more cats meowing
 at the television, no cigarettes on the patio, no more
 blessings in drag. My schedule is totally blank this afternoon.




subjects : Living, Separation & Divorce, Relationships, Men & Women, Activities, School & Learning