title : An Hispanic Identity Meaning Switches and False Twos

author : Roberto Harrison

text : 
					
					There’s a dispute as to whether a name can be given to mills or not. Ifan essential root is given to one arm, they might be revolvers in insect’scasings, winding down a river of dirt in giving you, America, too smalla thimble, the carcass of instruction and wavy, diminutive hand signals.From a cracked stone mouthing, to an unplayed game (still wrapped),to the skin of my plastic voice. There is a slow moving, not fast likethe static form of urban frames. If you want (and here is IF, again,with indecision) to describe misdirected outcroppings from a batteryof daylight shells, I mean light, I mean dark colored turtles, one map giving birth to another, this, flown heavy with rupture and landed aftera piece was found. Not enough. There is a simple solution to yourhouse, and my wooden block. One politic NOT on top of an Other, asone’s head is wrapped in a box, in a hole. Spittle looms swim, bide timeclicks, made queues on an S, connected to separate one from a ONE,towels, in seeing an ocean first and making Balboan curves, you knowthere are all kinds of sticks. A brick, painted with soft hair, builds upquestions to age and blacken linings, whip tailed lizards, their eyes arewhat implants carbonized blinking, placed alongside letters, the holdon becoming an END. Chips give sound to fingers, the Oh returningin flowing error, twice committed. Flood. Not a zero or a one, as ifcornered with prostituted faces leaning outward, an Escape weighingabout an army of lip collectors and fused hands and their whispers ofXs as in 2 again or more. There is the border of skin there is theborder of membrane there is the border of number. Tongues firing theburned and buried. 2 and on, and THEN its disappearance. Invisibilitysolidified, a welt on a willow. You know a letter, a cache in a person.Memory management errors undone. Fluid as blood. Blood as a turning through time.




subjects : Social Commentaries, Race & Ethnicity, Popular Culture