title : “The Decay of ancient knowledge”

author : Nick Lantz

text : 
      “considering that by such trade and entercourse, all things heretofore            uknowne, might have come to light.”                       —Pliny the Elder
To cure a child of rickets, split a living
 ash tree down its length and pass
 the child through
         (naked, headfirst, three times).
 Seal the two halves of the tree back up
 and bind them with loam and black
 thread. If the tree heals, so will the child.
         (The child must also be washed
         for three mornings in the dew 
                        of the chosen tree.)
  
 Two men
         (no, women)
             must pass the child through.
 The first must say, “The Lord receives,”
 and the second say, “The Lord gives.”
  
 This is how you ensure a happy marriage:
 This is how you keep the engine running:
  
 A jackdaw or swallow that flies down
 the chimney must be
                         killed. If it is allowed
 to leave the house by a window or door,
 a member of the family will
  
 This is how, when your mother tells 
 you she’s going in for biopsy, to make
 the growth benign:
  
 Burn a fire and in the morning examine
 the ashes for footprints, the image of a ring,
 the likeness of a cat, a bed, a horse, a
  
 This is how you keep from thinking of
 the one thought you’re thinking:
  
 Say your own name backwards three
 (no four) times and turn around (keep
 your eyes shut).

 The unborn child must be called pot lid
 or tea kettle until you hear its voice.
  
 Carry a live bat around the house three
 times, then nail it upside down outside
 the window. This will ensure
  
 If your mother calls you at 6 A.M. while
 she eats her breakfast (do not eat after
 7), this is how you can calm your voice:
  
 This is how you say Good luck and mean
  
 An egg laid on Sunday can be placed
 on the roof to ward of fire and lightning.
  
 If you put a stillborn child in an open
 grave, the man who is buried there will
 have a ticket straight to heaven.
  
 Never sleep with your feet toward the door.
  
 Do not sneeze while making a bed.
  
 Step on a beetle, and it will rain. Bury it
 alive in the earth for good weather. Put it
 in your mouth and your loved ones will
  
 When you see a dead bird lying in the road
 you must spit on it.
  
 If a rooster crows in the night, you must
 go and feel his feet.
  
 When a woman is in labor, all the locks
 in the house must be undone, windows
 and doors must be left ajar. This will
 not prevent death but will quicken
 the escape of the spirit if
  
 If the ash tree remedy fails, bring the child
 to a third
         (no, seventh)
                         generation blacksmith.
 The child must first be bathed
 in the water trough, then laid on the anvil.
 Each of the smith’s tool’s must be passed
 over the body, and each time one must
 inquire what the tool is used for (no one
 must answer). Then the blacksmith must 
 raise his hammer and bring it down (gently)
 three times (four) on the child’s body.
                         If a fee is given
 or even asked for, the cure will not
  
 If the phone rings, this is how you answer:
 This is how you say, How did it go?





subjects : Living, Health & Illness, Death, The Body, Relationships, Family & Ancestors, Religion, The Spiritual, Social Commentaries