title : Mozart’s Concerto for Glass Harmonica

author : Richard Garcia

text : 
There you are, at the gate of the memory palace
 underneath the rusted teeth of the portcullis,
 your hand raised in a puzzling gesture—
 is it farewell, come here, get back, no blame,
 or are you just trying to hitch a ride? But I’ve seen
 that gesture when you sleep, as if you were saying
 to someone, on the one hand . . . on the other hand.
 Here is a memory to store in the palace—
 You and I at the circus. The arena is dark
 except for one blue spotlight. In it, a clown
 stands before a table. On the table an array,
 crystal wine glasses filled with different levels
 of water. He’s dressed in white with a conical hat,
 tear marks on one cheek. With a wet finger,
 he plays music that was once forbidden
 because it made musicians lose their minds.
 There is a blank look in his eyes and he performs
 perfectly, as if he were a mechanical clown.
 Now look up, the lady on the trapeze
 is dropping large blue crepe-paper flowers.
 Maybe the palace is the size of a dollhouse
 and my eye at the window is the eye of a giant.
 Maybe the palace is in my chest and my heart
 is beating too loud inside. I remember
 when I woke but was still asleep and saw
 my chest rising and falling on its own
 and then I accidentally rolled out of my body
 and there were two of me lying side by side.
 In an alcove shaped like a scallop shell I’ve placed
 a list of the way lovers have said goodbye.
 Developer fluid heated up, passed off
 as consommé, is a standout. As is GOODBYE
 written in shaving cream on the dusty windows
 of a row of abandoned cars in Baja. Just as I begin
 to suspect what is wrong with this picture
 I notice how lightly you step over the grillwork
 of the oubliette, that terrible lace under which
 men are forgotten. You raise your hand again
 and now I understand that gesture—
 it’s how you erase the distant mountains,
 the palace, the sky, everything.





subjects : Living, The Body, Arts & Sciences, Music