title : Clubfoot

author : Rachel Wetzsteon

text : 
Meanwhile, meanwhile used to be my limp’s 
 accompaniment. Meanwhile (as my legs
 maneuvered an abyss), a ballet is
 beginning, and the dancer’s perfect feet
 propel her downstage, where applause is waiting.
 Meanwhile a sad man stomps his gloom away
 by stomping evenly: one two, one two
 means never blue, his motto goes. But I
 was born to other paces, different measures;
 the roads I take are undulant and lined
 with fluid hedges, trees that take a dive
 whenever I am near; a bird’s ascent
 slows down to an eternal crawl; and when
 a doctor’s order takes me to the city
 it is a jagged gotham, full of spires
 that waver in the sky like falling knives
 or silver metronomes. Meanwhile, meanwhile
 (the rhythm steadied me) a lover steals
 upon his mistress with the quietness
 that only flatfeet know. So quietly 
 that he might just as well have stayed at home,
 I add when my self-confidence is at
 a high point, and the view is at its best.
 And sometimes I have thoughts, before the surge
 of meanwhile drowns them out, that limping is
 a thing I’d voluntarily take up
 if I were just as upright as the rest:
 I see myself, erect, stampeding through
 a garden’s sturdy, stale geometry
 and nearly knocked down by the urge to say
 incline, I like your style; ravine, hello;
 how many good things share your curvature;
 it is the slant of rainfall when the wind
 convinces it to drift; it is a sight
 that those with level heads and steady feet
 miss out on. In a coracle (my new
 enthusiasm leads to stories), you
 are better, bent; the more you tilt, the more
 the water welcomes you, its addled waves
 a live reminder of your being there,
 its leaping fish a sign that you are still
 alert and in command. The clubfoots have
 a myth concerning Orpheus’ head,
 and though I doubt its authenticity
 I like the way it goes: hacked off, the head
 was rolling down the river, when a change
 came over it—it bobbed, it jumped, it shuddered,
 it caught itself in weeds, but struggled free
 because of all its energy, and then
 its eyes began to come to life, as if
 a pretty tune enthralled it even then.
 Meanwhile his killers marched away, saying
 he had his ups and downs. Of course, of course
 to hobble is to hinder: sick is sick,
 no matter how you change the second term
 to suit your needs. But sometimes I am sure
 that when I limp along a crooked street,
 my dancing shadow is a model for
 the stiffs who hurry past without a sound,
 showing them this way, that way, as they reach 
 the little level huts they call home.





subjects : Living, The Body, Mythology & Folklore, Greek & Roman Mythology