title : Walt Whitman at Bear Mountain

author : Louis Simpson

text : 
                  . . . life which does not give the preference to any other life, of any                   previous period, which therefore prefers its own existence . . .                                                                               Ortega y Gasset
 
 Neither on horseback nor seated,
 But like himself, squarely on two feet,
 The poet of death and lilacs
 Loafs by the footpath. Even the bronze looks alive
 Where it is folded like cloth. And he seems friendly.
  
 “Where is the Mississippi panorama
 And the girl who played the piano?
 Where are you, Walt?
 The Open Road goes to the used-car lot.
  
 “Where is the nation you promised?
 These houses build of wood sustain
 Colossal snows,
 And the light above the street is sick to death.
  
 “As for the people—see how they neglect you!
 Only a poet pauses to read the inscription.”
  
 “I am here,” he answered.
 “It seems you have found me out.
 Yet did I not warn you that it was Myself
 I advertised? Were my words not sufficiently plain?
  
 I gave no prescriptions,
 And those who have taken my moods for prophecies
 Mistake the matter.”
 Then, vastly amused—“Why do you reproach me?
 I freely confess I am wholly disreputable.
 Yet I am happy, because you found me out.”
 A crocodile in wrinkled metal loafing . . .
  
 Then all the realtors,
 Pickpockets, salesmen and the actors performing
 Official scenarios,
 Turned a deaf ear, for they had contracted
 American dreams.
  
 But the man who keeps a store on a lonely road,
 And the housewife who knows she’s dumb,
 And the earth, are relieved.
  
 All that grave weight of America
 Cancelled! Like Greece and Rome.
 The future in ruins!
 The castles, the prisons, the cathedrals
 Unbuilding, and roses
 Blossoming from the stones that are not there . . .
  
 The clouds are lifting from the high Sierras,
 The Bay mists clearing,
 And the angel in the gate, the flowering plum,
 Dances like Italy, imagining red.





subjects : Nature, Landscapes & Pastorals, Arts & Sciences, Poetry & Poets, Social Commentaries