title : On Pattern

author : Pimone Triplett

text : 
For Grandfather, in Bangkok
I can tell you, sweeping the several jigsaw lizards
          away from your casket, away from their expert
                    invasions, kneeling by the order of our births
 alongside the mother-of-pearl mosaics,
          the family at your death keeps to form,
                   having to act out that love of endings.
  
 I can say the little I know of how you lived
          is your patient gaze in old photographs,
                    surrounded by three generations, most of the spindling
 offspring back from the States or Australia or wherever
           they’d been taken, children barely known but abided
                    on holidays. Today I’m told we have to place
  
 pennies in the dead man’s mouth
          to remind us of the portions
                   left behind.
 You pay the debt,
            someone says, you give your something solid back,
                      push your currency up against the open,
 
up against the father tongue. It’s the formal
             silence we love, the hush that’s planned,
                       the good answer,
 monks, boyish and newly shorn, who know
          to whip your burial cloth exactly three times
                    over the altar flame to purify countless threads.
  
 Who know when to kneel, when to back away
          from the casket. The casket itself carved
                    patiently, inlaid with the images,
 portions left behind of silver
           shrunken disciples, each framed to each then
                              framed again by
  
 squares of alabaster scrollwork
                    whittled into black wood:
                              the whole teak surface worried,
 Grandfather, with carpenter’s gold,
                   splintered,
                            then resplintered, puzzled with lapis.
  
 The eastern window’s been slivered open,
          to make the sun stab
                   the craftmen’s metallic fretwork.
 The mourners too,
            suddenly embossed, become dozens shifting
                     to kneel. When a few clouds
  
 eclipse the sun, wiping away the borders,
            the frame and scrimshaw,
                     so that we stand
 briefly
          in the room’s darkened largeness,
                    next to me someone whispers,
  
 how your vessel is rented,
          a work
              to be given back.





subjects : Living, Death, Sorrow & Grieving, Relationships, Family & Ancestors, Religion, Other Religions