title : Let Us Sample Protection Together

author : Anselm Berrigan

text : 
When I was little I cut off the heads 
 of many lords. I can’t count on the energy
 that took to rise in me at will, but I’ve
 strengthened my ability to make a 
 stand-firm surface. A steady gaze will drive
 conflicted information away, back to the 
 abyss from whence it came, but I’ll be right
 here the morning after, wracked in a 
 private shame too awful to admit and
 of no consequence at all. I work very hard
 not to let myself go. Any channel
 can tell. Due process appears in beauty
 and misgiving at once; an agility
 borne from creative malice, a benign
 insecurity. The plain truth: I forget
 the curtains are open sometimes and the
 hands wander. The room stares back from its things:
 They understand the end of the world, will
 not waste time feeling your pain, and every-
 thing tragic in between need not be known.
 I don’t want love or remorse to follow
 I want them in the way, things to burst through
 corollaries to be roped and tackled
 by surprise, get killed, and thank you. One fate
 transforms into another, but I won’t
 touch that bandaged story. I won’t belong
 to this scripted conversation, though I
 may play along. Identity theft accepting
 renewal orders, copycat pre-emptive attacks
 an obscure murder string on the public
 glide by sight, the victim a John doughnut
 pining for leadership from the passenger seat.
 The threat of meaning reassures: I know
 it’s being made for me. Am I supposed
 to believe we’re receiving information?
 Can I defect back to curiosity 
 in the moonlight, stone rabbit? Hit on by
 Echo, I go cold for the love of my
 own exile, and while I hope, my flesh
 explodes into an arrangement of stars
 pestered by darkness. Those aren’t birds you
 hear, just their corresponding holes in the sky.
 All the bottled water isn’t fooling anyone.




subjects : Living, Youth, Relationships, Arts & Sciences, Language & Linguistics, Social Commentaries, Cities & Urban Life