title : Snapshots with Wide Apertures Shown on the Road

author : Pimone Triplett

text : 
1
  
 This one’s on Route 80 south of Water’s End, Arizona, speeding
 anywhere else when I’m tired
 of reading the yellow dash-and-dash, highway’s old adage.
 Sunglasses coaxed
 yellows to reds, though there are none where I look
 into the camera.
 Behind me, a blur of roadside cactus called
 “succulents,”
 for the moisture they save for years.
 The sky cut from indigo to blue to white until
 I wished for the sunset’s truncations to stay there,
 thinking, too, that the verge of its curve
 could flirt me into
 the absolute.
  
  
 2
  
 Moving on, in Bangkok, I’m always crouching in these,
 wanting to keep my head
 lower than his
 to show I know
 he’s Mother’s father.
  
 Asked, on going in, not to say anything
 if he brought up the distant
 old dealings, metallic shrillings
 of long-dead women,
 asked to ignore what they’d do for him,
 offerings he could almost eat a meal on.
  
 And this from the aunt who was asked to leave
 the family when she was young,
 “for the sake of the children,”
 drawing the bad lot.
 No one told me why.
  
 That’s my foot in the foreground.
 That was the daylight’s assignment
 of unwavering white, the background.
  
 These are only the circumstances. As for an end to the glare
 getting the last word in,
 there was none.
  
  
 3
  
 He’d set the machine on the tripod himself,
 return to read the newspaper, wait for the click,
 and want to keep it,
 the stop-time, that is,
 the pretending to read the newspaper.
 Held half in the shadow fans of the palm tree,
 half in a browbeat of sun.
 So that the machine had to catch him quickly, the clarity,
 the shot of his legs as
  
 suddenly: brown leather sheaves holding bone.
  
  
 4
  
 Say the moment arrives
 at the frame, and she who is about to enter
 the picture approaches.
 At the end of the road trip, she turns back
 in the hopes of memorizing what’s been passed,
 the colors that changed, the mirror-winks,
 the real moisture, invisible, along side mirage.
  
 His face was a once-darker shade of dust in his country.
 Some days he’d set the aperture, the opening,
 as wide as he could,
 to ruin the picture, to let all the light in.
  





subjects : Living, Life Choices, Relationships, Family & Ancestors, Activities, Travels & Journeys, Nature, Landscapes & Pastorals, Arts & Sciences, Photography & Film