title : from “In Our Own Backyard”

author : Norma Cole

text : 
You can’t imagine what it’s like here. In her past
 life, she was a clandestine operator in ancient
 Egypt. In a past life she had her heart ripped out,
 ritual sacrifice. We all know what that
 means, right, to have your heart ripped out. Torn
 from the body, one’s “own” body, alive and torn.
  
  
 The unspeaking speaker. The man coughs.
 Orientation. Two bells, a motorcar on the 
 street, on-lookers. H22-3416. Men, maybe
 four, inside. Vast numbers of people, faces
 turned to the east. Four nurses holding four
 swaddled babes, four bottles.
  
  
 Six men walking forward on a country road
 all wearing suits, coats, vests and ties. Upon
 his shoulders, one of the men carries a man with
 no legs. The man with no legs is wearing a
 bathrobe. In a landscape a train passes from
 top right to bottom left. People are packed inside
 as well as on the roof and holding on at the sides.
  
  
 One man, naked, his back turned to the
 window, light on inside. A bird in a cage hung
 on a hook at the top left-hand corner of the
 window. A man in profile to the left, eyes closed
 mouth open wide, singing. Or thought he was
 singing. He did. Or we did. The back of a chair and
 three tall mirrors. At their focal point a woman
 stands, arms akimbo. She’s wearing evening dress
 black high heels, long white gown, long black
 gloves, necklace, earrings.
  
  
 Outside the bakery, a horse-drawn hearse
 approaches. A woman in an apron tests green grapes
 eating them before placing bunches in a wooden
 crate. Inside a Quonset hut, there’s a long
 table with men sitting in chairs writing or paying
 attention to one man standing at the table, hands
 in the pockets of his jumpsuit. Shirtless men seated
 on the floor, some on towels or blankets, are doing
 exercises. Friday afternoon, cold grim day. We meet
 in the museum, at a picture called “Birmingham.”
  
  
 Sign on exterior wall saying “WELCOME.”





subjects : Living, The Body, Arts & Sciences, Language & Linguistics, Social Commentaries