title : Canto XXXVI

author : Ezra Pound

text : 
A Lady asks me
                I speak in season
 She seeks reason for an affect, wild often
 That is so proud he hath Love for a name 
 Who denys it can hear the truth now
 Wherefore I speak to the present knowers
 Having no hope that low-hearted
               Can bring sight to such reason
 Be there not natural demonstration
                I have no will to try proof-bringing
 Or say where it hath birth
 What is its virtu and power
 Its being and every moving 
 Or delight whereby ‘tis called “to love”
 Or if man can show it to sight. 
  
 Where memory liveth,
                it takes its state
 Formed like a diafan from light on shade
 Which shadow cometh of Mars and remaineth
 Created, having a name sensate,
 Custom of the soul,
                will from the heart;
 Cometh from a seen form which being understood
 Taketh locus and remaining in the intellect possible
 Wherein hath he neither weight nor still-standing, 
 Descendeth not by quality but shineth out
 Himself his own effect unendingly 
 Not in delight but in the being aware
 Nor can he leave his true likeness otherwhere. 
  
 He is not vertu but cometh of that perfection
 Which is so postulate not by the reason
 But ‘tis felt, I say. 
 Beyond salvation, holdeth his judging force
 Deeming intention to be reason’s peer and mate,
 Poor in discernment, being thus weakness’ friend 
 Often his power cometh on death in the end,
 Be it withstayed
                 and so swinging counterweight.
 Not that it were natural opposite, but only
 Wry’d a bit from the perfect,
 Let no man say love cometh from chance
 Or hath not established lordship
 Holding his power even though
                Memory hath him no more. 
  
 Cometh he to be 
                when the will 
 From overplus
 Twisteth out of natural measure,
 Never adorned with rest Moveth he changing colour
 Either to laugh or weep
 Contorting the face with fear
                resteth but a little
 Yet shall ye see of him That he is most often 
 With folk who deserve him
 And his strange quality sets sighs to move
 Willing man look into that forméd trace in his mind
 And with such uneasiness as rouseth the flame. 
 Unskilled can not form his image,
 He himself moveth not, drawing all to his stillness,
 Neither turneth about to seek his delight
 Nor yet to see out proving
 Be it so great or so small. 
  
 He draweth likeness and hue from like nature
 So making pleasure more certain in seeming
 Nor can stand hid in such nearness,
 Beautys be darts tho’ not savage
 Skilled from such fear a man follows
 Deserving spirit, that pierceth.
 Nor is he known from his face
 But taken in the white light that is allness
 Toucheth his aim
 Who heareth, seeth not form
 But is led by its emanation
 Being divided, set out from colour,
 Disjunct in mid darkness
 Grazeth the light, one moving by other,
 Being divided, divided from all falsity
 Worthy of trust
 From him alone mercy proceedeth. 
  
 Go, song, surely thou mayest
 Whither it please thee 
 For so art thou ornate that thy reasons 
 Shall be praised from thy understanders,
 With others hast thou no will to make company. 
  
 “Called thrones, balascio or topaze”
 Eriugina was not understood in his time
 “which explains, perhaps, the delay in condemning him”
 And they went looking for Manicheans
 And found, so far as I can make out, no Manicheans
 So they dug for, and damned Scotus Eriugina
 “Authority comes from right reason,
                 never the other way on”
 Hence the delay in condemning him
 Aquinas head down in a vacuum,
                Aristotle which way in a vacuum?
 Sacrum, sacrum, inluminatio coitu.
 Lo Sordels si fo di Mantovana
                 of a castle named Goito. 
 “Five castles! 
 “Five castles!”
                 (king giv’ him five castles)
 “And what the hell do I know about dye-works?!”
 His Holiness has written a letter:
                 “CHARLES the Mangy of Anjou….
 ..way you treat your men is a scandal….”
 Dilectis miles familiaris…castra Montis Odorisii
 Montis Sancti Silvestri pallete et pile…
 In partibus Thetis….vineland
                                                 land tilled
                                                 the land incult
                                                 pratis nemoribus pascuis
                                                 with legal jurisdiction
 his heirs of both sexes,
 …sold the damn lot six weeks later,
 Sordellus de Godio.
                 Quan ben m’albir e mon ric pensamen.




subjects : Relationships, Men & Women, Arts & Sciences, Language & Linguistics, Social Commentaries, Crime & Punishment, Mythology & Folklore, Greek & Roman Mythology, Love, Desire, Infatuation & Crushes