title : The Librarian

author : Charles Olson

text : 
The landscape (the landscape!) again: Gloucester,
 the shore one of me is (duplicates), and from which
 (from offshore, I, Maximus) am removed, observe.
  
 In this night I moved on the territory with combinations
 (new mixtures) of old and known personages: the leader,
 my father, in an old guise, here selling books and manuscripts.
  
 My thought was, as I looked in the window of his shop,
 there should be materials here for Maximus, when, then,
 I saw he was the young musician has been there (been before me)
  
 before. It turned out it wasn’t a shop, it was a loft (wharf-
 house) in which, as he walked me around, a year ago
 came back (I had been there before, with my wife and son,
  
 I didn’t remember, he presented me insinuations via
 himself and his girl) both of whom I had known for years.
 But never in Gloucester. I had moved them in, to my country.
  
 His previous appearance had been in my parents’ bedroom where I
 found him intimate with my former wife: this boy
 was now the Librarian of Gloucester, Massachusetts!
  

                          Black space,
                          old fish-house.
                          Motions
                          of ghosts.
                          I,
                          dogging
                          his steps.
                          He
                          (not my father,
                          by name himself
                          with his face
                          twisted
                          at birth)
                          possessed of knowledge
                          pretentious
                          giving me
                          what in the instant
                          I knew better of.
   
                          But the somber
                          place, the flooring
                          crude like a wharf’s
                          and a barn’s 
                          space
  
  
 I was struck by the fact I was in Gloucester, and that my daughter
 was there—that I would see her! She was over the Cut. I
 hadn’t even connected her with my being there, that she was
  
 here. That she was there (in the Promised Land—the Cut!
 But there was this business, of poets, that all my Jews
 were in the fish-house too, that the Librarian had made a party 
  
 I was to read. They were. There were many of them, slumped
 around. It was not for me. I was outside. It was the Fort.
 The Fort was in East Gloucester—old Gorton’s Wharf, where the Library
  
 was. It was a region of coal houses, bins. In one a gang
 was beating someone to death, in a corner of the labyrinth
 of fences. I could see their arms and shoulders whacking
  
 down. But not the victim. I got out of there. But cops
 tailed me along the Fort beach toward the Tavern
  
                          The places still
                          half-dark, mud,
                          coal dust.
  
                          There is no light
                          east
                          of the Bridge
  
                          Only on the headland
                          toward the harbor
                          from Cressy’s
  
                          have I seen it (once
                          when my daughter ran
                          out on a spit of sand
  
                          isn’t even there.) Where
                          is Bristow? when does I-A
                          get me home? I am caught
  
                          in Gloucester. (What’s buried
                          behind Lufkin’s
                          Diner? Who is
  
                          Frank Moore?  





subjects : Relationships, Family & Ancestors, Activities, Jobs & Working, Arts & Sciences, Reading & Books, Social Commentaries, History & Politics, Town & Country Life