title : The Synthetic A Priori

author : Kathleen Graber

text : 
     What objects may be in themselves, and apart from all            this receptivity of our sensibility, remains completely           unknown to us. We know nothing but our mode of            perceiving them. . . . With this alone have we             any concern.           —Immanuel Kant, Critique of Pure Reason

At a church rummage sale, I study the perfection of shadows
 in a painting by Caravaggio, although what I hold
 is only a small print of Christ—its frame broken—dining
 at Emmaus with three of the Apostles. And because the table 
 is dramatically, if not unbelievably, lit, the bowls & pitcher
 & loaves send their dark crescents onto the immaculate
 white cloth. When the Savior raises his hand to offer a blessing,
 its shade deepens further his crimson smock. Tenebrosus:
 that rich, convincing darkness. As though the master understood
 that the obscured world only seems to us somehow
 even more familiar, as though our sense of our own unknowing
 had at last been made visible—even if what we do not know
 cannot itself be seen. The future’s drape, the carnival fortunetellers
 of my childhood might have called it, but also the now’s,
 displayed as it is—so many unmatched cups & saucers, old coats
 & wicker baskets—all around us. At a party last week,
 someone said verisimilitude. We were huddled on a tiny porch.
 It was the first cool night & the wine had no conclusion.
  
 The talk turned quickly to shepherds & the pastoral & then,
 to opera, before someone recalled a horror film he’d watched
 late one night with his brother. In black & white vignettes,
 an evil tree stump possessed by the spirit of an executed prince
 hunts the scheming tribal elders who have destroyed him.
 A former pro wrestler in a costume of wire & rubber bark
 & wearing a permanent scowl lumbers after vengeance
 in the confusion & fear of 1957 on a half-dozen root-legs,
 driving his victims into quicksand or toppling himself over
 upon him. Though here the point is the teller’s small brother
 & the boy’s allegiance, even in a state of suspended disbelief,
 to what we call sense. How, he wanted to know, suddenly
 unusually earnest, did the tree manage to get itself up again?
  
 Yesterday I spoke to a friend who is despairing: back home,
 waiting tables, he’s dating a woman whose marriage has only
 just come to an end. When he wakes, he discovers he does not
recognize himself. One afternoon, walking home from school,
 I hit my best friend in the face with a book. It may well be 
 that she hit me. Thin pages flew out into the street. More punches
 were thrown & I came away bruised. In that book, a novel
 by Emily Brontë, the land is violent & unjust & we are violent
 & unjust upon it. Even worse, our greatest passions
 change nothing at all. Before one of us hit the other,
 there must have been a cause, but I can’t recall it, which makes it
 seem nonlinear now, &, thus, apocryphal, both impossible
 & impossibly real. I failed, though I tried, to offer comfort.
  
 It’s not that our lives don’t resemble our lives. I’ve been alone
 so often lately I sometimes catch myself watching myself—
 breathing in the fresh spears of rosemary or admiring the shallots,
 peeling their translucent wrappers away, centering one on the board,
 making the first careful cut, lifting the purple halves.
  
 Before stories, we were too busy for stories, too busy
 hunting & suffering to invent the tales of our own
 resurrections. Caught out in the kitchen’s brightness last night,
 the handle of the skillet cast its simple, perfected form
 across the stove—pierced, like the eye of the needle, so that
 it can be hung from a hook, as pans, presumably, have always been.
  
 Outside the wind picked up. Thunder. The dog trotted off,
 hid her head beneath the chair. But today: a charity sale
 at Trinity Chapel & sun on the tar of the buckled walks.
 In the cracks, beads of water spin into light. Tell yourself
 it’s simple: this is where it’s been heading all along. Tell yourself
 something you have no faith in has already begun to occur.





subjects : Religion, Christianity, Arts & Sciences, Painting & Sculpture, Social Commentaries, History & Politics