title : Shaved Head

author : John Hennessy

text : 
Forget contingencies from weather and wind,
 my Helen’s head was shaved, the shortest bit 
 of stubble growing in. With darkened arching
 black eye-brows, Betty-Blue mouth penciled red,
  
 jet patent-leather trench and high-heeled boots,
 she seemed more mannequin for Fashion Ave.’s
 penitent spread than enemy to brass
 at Camp LeJeune. Simply and grudgingly put,
  
 her talk was action. Invincible in Bell-
 Atlantic block and tack, she converted non-coms 
 and saved CO’s, harped flint and skinned the chair
 of military courts through well-pitched cheek,
  
 prompt dispatch from the War Resister’s League.
 She looked good even on a bicycle, hemming left
 through traffic on Fourteenth Street, locking up
 on Lafayette or Grand. She doused for me
  
 to celebrate—marched right through human waste
 and Bowery puddles, stretched her legs over the last
 old-fashioned hobos up to East Second Street.
 Those ancient days, our vestibule was manned
  
 by crack-dealing Stan, a concierge of wit
 and improv, half his face scored by orange scars 
 from hydrofluoric burns. He kept the place safe.
 But I had gone, cleared out behind a gang
  
 of kids from Bronxville high on catnip wins,
 shell-game victims. Left Stan my toaster, shelves,
 a wire bird-cage, and, for once, nothing to say.
 Except to ask if he could touch her skull.

Even now it makes no sense. Her precedents
 I knew lurched out of focus: photos from France
 after the Vichy fell, Jeannes and Sylvianes
 who’d made Nazi moll; those Belfast girls
  
 last-ditched by soldier boys or peelers; two-
 toned Bergen-Belsen, bald sister to Fort Santiago.
 Then Squeaky Fromm, the other Manson moms,
 at Charlie’s trial. Extremes of Joan of Arc,
  
 or even Buddhist nuns. Hated, chastened—
 or chaste, at least. Not what you’d run (I ran)
 your fingers satisfied across, the stubble
 surprising, soft as mink or fox, and arch
  
 your back, as I did once she found me uptown, 
 say yes I give again when she went down—
 and faster now, quick as the television 
 dropped after dishes to the curb—or slipped 
  
 gradually up, the seconds separating
 as slowly as but more exquisitely than
 ticks off expensive fifty-minute hours—
 and some community service—all gone, and just 
  
 as easily forgotten the raft of former friends 
 I’d cursed and floated off the island. Shaved head, 
 her slender neck, dark shoulders—that was half—
 or less—her most convincing argument.
  





subjects : Living, The Body