title : Blues for Almost Forgotten Music

author : Roxane Beth Johnson

text : 
I am trying to remember the lyrics of old songs
                                                             I’ve forgotten, mostly
 I am trying to remember one-hit wonders, hymns,
                                               and musicals like West Side Story.
 Singing over and over what I can recall, I hum remnants on 
                                                              buses and in the car.
  
 I am so often alone these days with echoes of these old songs
                                                           and my ghosted lovers.
 I am so often alone that I can almost hear it, can almost feel
                                                         the half-touch of others,
 can almost taste the licked clean spine of the melody I’ve lost.
  
 I remember the records rubbed with static and the needle
                                                                      gathering dust.
 I remember the taste of a mouth so sudden and still cold from
                                                                          wintry gusts.
 It seemed incredible then — a favorite song, a love found.
                                                                 It wasn't, after all.
  
 Days later, while vacuuming, the lyrics come without thinking.
 Days later, I think I see my old lover in a café but don’t,
                                                                         how pleasing
 it was to think it was him, to finally sing that song.
  
 This is the way of all amplitude: we need the brightness
                                                                          to die some.
 This is the way of love and music: it plays like a god and
                                                                        then is done.
 Do I feel better remembering, knowing for certain
                                                                        what’s gone?





subjects : Living, The Mind, Time & Brevity, Relationships, Arts & Sciences, Music, Love, Heartache & Loss