title : Missing Carnival

author : John Hennessy

text : 
O Venlo, Venlo, stedje van pleseer. This time
 her body made him think of countryside,
 some figure from his childhood, sun on scythe,
 wind blowing shadows across the shining barley, 
  
 the milk-pail dented from use, the smell of leaf-mulch
 and leather in the tack room. Soon she’d take bus
 and ferry from London to Belfast, but first
 the fire in her bed-sit. Her fingers traveled too,
  
 down the raised purple scars along his vertebrae, 
 the flannel sheets between her thighs, his hair 
 trailing along her abdomen, the quill 
 of a feather poking through seams of the comforter, 
  
 the comforter itself. Those scars—he’d lied
 to her, his time in Nicaragua, thugs cut 
 him coming from the fields. The bloodier fight 
 was with his brother, slicing tines of a pitchfork 
  
 plucked up along the flooded Maas. Everything 
 reduced to trinket and anecdote, the beer 
 and facepaint of carnival, street-dance and tuba, 
 beyond the muddy English roundabouts, the brown
  
 and white waves, yellow lamps along Dutch highways, 
 his work at the union office pinned beneath
 a glass globe paperweight—shaken 
 it showered silver snow over the wide
  
 straw hat, red and green plow, the slouching body,
 a campesino from days before Somoza fell.
 He wondered if she were any better, smuggling 
 French social theory into Ulster, encounter
  
 groups in the rec-centers of tower-block basements.
 She’d just gotten the news: her last lover died 
 in a fire along the side of the highway, body 
 broken in seven places, silver chrome,
  
 pearl and gold gas tank scorched, his bike crumpled
 beneath the husk of an overturned van.
 There wasn’t much to talk about. Afterwards she lay
 with her back to him and he sang her carnival songs
  
in a language she didn’t speak, O Venlo, stedje van
 pleseer. He thought of himself as the sun, kissing
 her neck at the hairline, turning grey cobblestones 
 of the town-square silver, marshaling parades.
  





subjects : Living, Sorrow & Grieving, The Body, Social Commentaries, History & Politics, War & Conflict, Love, Desire, Realistic & Complicated