title : In the Cold Kingdom

author : Mona Van Duyn

text : 
"The younger brother roasted a breast of Pishiboro'selephant wife and handed Pishiboro some, which hepresently ate. Then the younger brother said in avoice full of scorn. 'Oh you fool. You lazy man. Youwere married to meat and you thought it was a wife.'"    FROM A MYTH OF THE BUSHMEN
Poised upside down on its duncecap,
 a shrunken purple head,
 True Blueberry,
 enters its tightening frame of orange lip,
 and the cream of a child’s cheek is daubed with
 Zanzibar Cocoa, while
       Here at the Martha Washington
       Ice Cream Store
       we outdo the Symbolistes.
a fine green trickle—
 Pistachio? Mint Julep?
       Words have colors,
       and colors are tasty.
 sweetens his chin.
 In front of me Licorice teeters like a lump of coal
 on its pinkish base of Pumpkin.
       A Rauschenberg tongue
       fondles this rich donnée,
       then begins to erase it.
  
 Turning from all that is present
 in the flesh, so to speak,
 let the eye wander off to a menu,
 where it can start to ingest
 “Quite Sour Lemon sherbet
 topped with a stem cherry and chocolate sprinkles
      Swilling in language,
 all floating in bubbly cherry phosphate
      the bloated imagination 
      is urged to open still wider
      and shovel it in,
 and served with a twist of pretzel.”
 In this world “Creamy Vanilla and
 Smooth Swiss Chocolate ice creams”
 can be “blended with chopped pineapple,
 dark fudge sauce, ripe bananas, whipped topping,
 cookies, roasted nutmeats and nippy chopped cherries.”
     the Unconscious, that old hog,
     being in charge here of the 
     creative act.
  
 At about the moment my tastebuds
 receive a last tickle of Gingersnap
 and begin to respond to 
 Orange Fudge, I look at you
 who have bought my ice cream cones for twenty years,
     Moving another new ice to the mouth
     we needn’t remember
 and look away
     it is always the same mouth
     that melts it.
 My mind assembles a ribald tower
 of sherbet dips, all on one cone,
 Apricot, Apple, Tangerine, Peach, Prune, Lime,
 and then it topples.
 You are steadier than I.
 You order one dip always,
 or, in a dish, two dips of the same flavor.
  
 In this hysterical brilliance of neon
     Come on, consumers, 
     we’ve got to keep scooping
 it is twelve or fifteen of us
 to thirty ice creams.
     so that the creams shall not rise
      like cold lava out of their bins,
      numbing our feet, our knees,
      freezing our chests, our chins, our eyes,
 Open the door, quick, 
 and let in two handholding adolescents.
 Coping with all those glands
 makes them good and hungry.
     so that, flying out of their cannisters,
     the chopped nuts
     shall not top off our Technicolor grave
     with their oily ashes.
  
 Listen! All around us toothsome cones
 are suffering demolition
 down to the last, nipple-like tip.
 How do we know where to stop?
 Perhaps the glasses and dishes
 are moulded of candy, and the counters and windows…
       Over your half-eaten serving of Italian Delight,
       why are you looking at me
       the way you are looking at me?
  





subjects : Living, Marriage & Companionship, Midlife, Life Choices, Relationships, Home Life, Activities, Eating & Drinking, Social Commentaries, Money & Economics, Popular Culture, Love, Realistic & Complicated