title : Precious Lord

author : John Taggart

text : 
1

Not sweet sixteen not even sweet sixteen and she’﻿s moaning
 not even sixteen years old and she’﻿﻿s moaning﻿
 not even sweet sixteen and she’﻿s moaning the words
 moaning out the words to “Precious Lord”
 she says “ain’﻿t no harm to moan” and she’﻿s moaning
 it’﻿s Aretha in the New Bethel Baptist Church in Detroit in 1956
 words moaned out so that she becomes denuded
 no more little black dress she has nothing to hide
 no more little black dress she has nothing left to hide.
  
 Thomas Dorsey wrote the words wrote the words and the music 
 Thomas Dorsey wrote the words and the music for “Precious Lord”
 Thomas Dorsey aka Georgia Tom wrote other songs
 one of the other songs “Deep Moaning Blues”
 Thomas Dorsey: “I like the long moaning groaning tone”
 Georgia Tom moaned “Deep Moaning Blues” with Ma Rainey
 Georgia Tom and Ma Rainey moan they moan and groan
 their moaning and groaning make you see
 moaning and groaning you’﻿re made to see they have  nothing.
  

      2

The first time Mahalia does it as one interconnected phrase
 she does it as three in one three words in one phrase
 three in one: “take-en-n—my-ah-aah—ha-an-nd”
 Mahalia does it in the same year in 1956 the same year as Aretha
 same but different the second time it is more aggressive
 it’﻿s more aggressive: “take-ake my-ah han-and”
 Mahalia was a big fine woman Mahalia was denuded
 she sang “Precious Lord” at the funeral of Martin Luther King
 Aretha sang “Precious Lord” at the funeral of Mahalia.
  
 Thomas Dorsey met Mahalia met her for the first time in 1928
 it was in 1928 that Georgia Tom moaned with Ma Rainey
 he moaned with Ma Rainey he moaned and he groaned with Ma Rainey
 he met Mahalia and he taught her how to moan
 “you teach them how to say their words in a moanful way”
 to say their words how to say his words
 Mahalia was a big fine woman Mahalia was denuded
 Dorsey knew the heavier the voice the better the singer
 Dorsey knew as any teacher knows the heavier the better.
  

      3

Al Green has a softened voice he has a voice made softened
 he was made to sing softened by Willie Mitchell in 1972
 softened and softened and softened
 Al Green became Rev. Al Green of the Full Gospel Tabernacle in 1980
 a tabernacle is a fixed or movable habitation
 habitation where you stay together with the lord
 Al Green has a softened voice he has a voice made softened
 he was made to sing softened on “Let’﻿s Stay Together”
 in 1982 he was made to sing softened on “Precious Lord.”
  
 Photograph of Thomas Dorsey photograph of a smooth operator
 photograph of Georgia Tom photo of a smooth operator
 the photo smoothed out retouched softened
 one side of the face completely light one side of the face all dark
 one side merges into the light smoothed out softened
 one side merges into the dark smoothed out made softened
 in the photograph a smooth operator is lighting a cigarette
 slender fingers hold a matchbox hold a match
 slender fingers hold a softened flame against the softened dark.


      4
  
 “Lead me” sing “lead me” they move with a repetitive rhythm
 Dom Mocquereau: “rhythm is the ordering of the movement”
 repetitive rhythm orders them to move on “lead”
 they move with all their weight on “lead” it sounds like “feed”
 it’﻿s the Soul Stirrers it’﻿s the most rhythmic music you ever heard
 repetitive rhythm it sounds like “feed me”
 S.R. Crain tenor A.L. Johnson baritone J.J. Farley bass
 Edmond Jabè﻿s: “can we be healed by repetition?”
 the Soul Stirrers move with a repetitive rhythm sing “feed me.”
  
 Thomas Dorsey came to Chicago came looking for deliverance
 Georgia Tom came in 1916 the Soul Stirrers in 1937
 to get deliverance you have to wait on the movements of providence
 he played piano he sang at buffet flats at rent parties
 he was a smooth player and he sang softly
 a smooth player they called him “the whispering piano player”
 the most popular dance at the parties was the slow drag
 he learned how to drag easy how to sing softly
 how to drag easy how to wait on the movements of providence.

 
      5

Soul Stirrers move with a repetitive rhythm sing “feed me”
 repetitive rhythm orders them to sing “feed me”
 R.H. Harris sings lead he sings the essential word
 R.H. Harris taught Sam Cooke and Sam Cooke taught Johnny Taylor
 Johnny Taylor “Who’﻿﻿s Making Love” 1968
 R.H. Harris: “they got a touch of me even if they don’﻿﻿t know me”
 what they got a touch of touch of tongue love
 R.H. Harris taught them to study the essential word
 the word brings it to a picture it’﻿﻿s the lord making love.
  
 Thomas Dorsey wrote the words wrote the words and the music
 Thomas Dorsey wrote the words wrote the essential word
 wrote “precious” not “blessed” the essential word is “precious”
 this was to be enshrined as a moment of epiphany
 moment when he wrote the better-sounding word
 moment of é﻿piphanie epiphania epiphano epiphaneia epiphanies
 moment of epiphany essential word shining picture
 Dorsey: “that thing like something hit me and went all over me”
 that thing must be that same thing went all over him.
  

      6

Clara Ward’﻿﻿s real nasal her nasality makes her a real moaner
 she moans the three in one three words in one word
 she moans so that one word becomes three
 one becomes three: “thru-uuu-uah”
 double-clutches just like Aretha: “thru-ah thru-uuu-uah the night”
 sounds just like Aretha because Aretha sounds just like her
 Aretha followed Clara Ward note for moaning note
 denuded Aretha followed denuded Clara
 and did Aretha follow her to the lord to the lord to the light.
  
 Thomas Dorsey was invited to Philadelphia by Gertrude Ward
 Mrs. Gertrude Mae Murphy Ward the mother of Clara
 in 1931 Mrs. Ward was told in a vision was told to go and to sing
 Dorsey was invited to teach the Wards how to sing
 how to say his words in a moanful way
 Dorsey liked the long moaning groaning tone
 Mrs. Ward was told in a vision a vision from the lord
 Dorsey taught Clara and Clara taught Aretha
 how to say his words in a moanful way all through the night.
  

      7

Sounds like “feed me” doesn’﻿﻿t sound like the Soul Stirrers
 it’﻿﻿s not the Soul Stirrers it’﻿﻿s the Kings of Harmony
 the Kings of Harmony with Carey Bradley on lead
 Carey Bradley was taught by Silas Steele the first hard lead
 Silas Steele sang lead for the Blue Jay Singers
 those singers recorded the first quartet version of a Dorsey song
 Silas Steele sang hard with a repetitive rhythm
 question is can we be healed by repetition
 over “feed me” Carey Bradley sings hard: “take-ah my hand.”
  
 Blue Jay Singers the first quartet to record a Dorsey song
 in 1931 those singers recorded “If You See My Saviour”
 those singers: “if you see my saviour tell him that you saw me”
 in 1931 Georgia Tom recorded “Please Mr. Blues”
Georgia Tom recorded in 1931 with Tampa Red
Georgia Tom and Tampa Red recorded a low moaning blues
 “Please Mr. Blues” is a deep low-down moaning blues
those singers: “please be careful handle me like a child”
 if you saw their saviour you would see Mr. Blues.
  

      8

Brother Joe May has a big voice has a big and loud voice
 Brother Joe May the thunderbolt of the Middle West
 the way he sang “pra-aaa-aaa-aaa-shus” is like thunder
 he was taught to sing “pra-aaa-aaa-aaa-shus” by Mother Smith
 he was taught to sing by Mother Willie Mae Ford Smith
 she was called Mother he called her Mother
 Mother Smith: “the lord just anoints me while I’﻿﻿m singing”
 when you’﻿﻿re anointed something goes all over you
 must be that same thng went all over her went all over her son.
  
 Mrs. Willie May introduced “If You See My Saviour” in 1930
 this was before she was called Mother
 twenty years before Brother Joe May sang “pra-aaa-aaa-aaa-shus”
 in 1930 in Chicago at the National Baptist Convention
 during the morning devotions at the convention
 she sang “you saw me” during the morning devotions
 in 1930 in Chicago Georgia Tom recorded “She Can Love So Good”
 in 1931 in Chicago Georgia Tom recorded “Please Mr. Blues”
 if you saw her you’﻿﻿d see Mr. Blues loving her so good.
  

      9

Way past sixteen way past sweet sixteen and she’﻿﻿s moaning
 she says “when I don’﻿﻿t feel like singing I moan”
 it’﻿﻿s Sister Rosetta Tharpe at The Hot Club de France in 1966
 Sister Rosetta had dyed her hair red played a hollow-body jazz guitar
 Sister Rosetta has a resonating vibrato
 she moans “ho-oo-oo-oo-meh” with a resonat﻿ing vibrato
 she moans out “ho-oo-oo-oo-meh” becomes resonant
 “when I don’﻿﻿﻿﻿t feel like singing I moan”
 she becomes completely resonant she has nothing left to hide.
  
 Thomas Dorsey wrote the words wrote the words and the music
 Thomas Dorsey wrote the words and the music for “Precious Lord”
 the song is an answer song to another song
 answer to George Nelson Allen’﻿﻿﻿s “Must Jesus Bear the Cross Alone?”
 George Nelson Allen thought the answer was no
 a cross for everyone “there’﻿﻿﻿s a cross for everyone”
 Thomas Dorsey thought the answer was no
 “see you got to be susceptible for whatever comes in the ear”
 he got Sister Rosetta to be susceptible got everyone susceptible.




subjects : Arts & Sciences, Music, Social Commentaries, Cities & Urban Life, History & Politics, Popular Culture