title : Pride Diary

author : Jenny Factor

text : 
1

Who knew it’﻿﻿﻿s quite all right that I downed three
 gin-and-tonics (can’﻿﻿﻿t fit male inside
 female part on fanny pack) at four
 o’﻿﻿﻿clock the Dyke March day of NY Pride?
 Who knew Manhattan streets would liquefy
 and lurch with dames sans bras, sans hair, sans shirt
 in step with beer-can band led by a skirt-
 ed trans in green brassiere, led by the cops
 whose sentries are staid as posts with glasses on,
 lined up beside the march like S/M tops?
 (They seem to think Gay Pride’﻿﻿﻿s this weekend’﻿﻿﻿s yawn.)
 (Pit stop at McD’﻿﻿﻿s, can’﻿﻿﻿t clip pack back on.)
 Who knew she’﻿﻿﻿d march beside me hand-in-hand
 and who’﻿﻿﻿d expect me to remember names
 when Liz’﻿﻿﻿s girlfriend saw us and waved “Hi.
 It’﻿﻿﻿s . . . Anna”? (CNN shot feed, then frames.)
 Booze-stymied by the glare of girls and sky,
 how could I choose? Should I grip hand, or pray
 wondering: Is today today the day
 she’﻿﻿﻿ll let me turn the key, lead her inside?

 
      2

Okay, I’﻿﻿﻿m sober now. Today is just
 the kind of day she talks but feels no lust.

 
      3

Beside her isn’﻿﻿﻿t bad. Fan-stirred, the air
 is humid and the theater is packed.
 An ear-cuffed thespian tries to fix the cold,
 our leading ladies sweat it out in back.
 A prim man to my right begins to sneeze.
 My nose is in agreement. The perfume
 from Queen Mother there could clear the room.
 This shadow play across her face is fine.
 Her arm’﻿﻿﻿s near mine, which means exactly nothing.
 Hope’﻿﻿﻿s hope hums on through separate listening.
 That skull, opaque to me as Midland’﻿﻿﻿s vault,
 her silky crop, its pepper dabbed with salt —
 I chuckle at an apt sardonic line.
 Her suede complexion, lifts up, checks the time.

 
      4. Les Nouvceaux from La Nouvelle Justine

I don’﻿﻿﻿t love her. She doesn’﻿﻿﻿t love me. Neither
 does this waiter who may think it strange
 when young girls dine with staid dames twice their age
 on salade de Bastille and pain de Sade.
 I don’﻿﻿﻿t like sitting by her like wet cloth.
 I don’﻿﻿﻿t like restaurants whose queers pawn sex
 to the bachelor bunch who want a thrill.
 I don’﻿﻿﻿t like dining with my, well, not-ex,
 both measuring the humid air for signs
 of sparks I see by parts will not ignite.
 I’﻿﻿﻿d rather have a knock-down, drag-out fight
 that cleared the joint than watch another guy
 get spanked by Corset Kris, who’﻿﻿﻿d like to grab
 a tit, not spend hip humping hairy thighs.
 I’﻿﻿﻿d rather I were twice her age and wise.
 I’﻿﻿﻿d spin cruel stories of past day of bliss
 then give my own hands covert exercise
 and send her home to bed without a kiss.
  

      5. L’﻿﻿﻿Addition
  
 30 for the play and 10 for gins,
 10 for two cabs and 40 for the eats,
 at least the metro home was freezer-cold,
 at least the Broadway Local still had seats
 at 96th, the local went express.
 I blistered home ten sockless humid blocks
 back to my solo digs for solo sex.
 I got this poem for my 90 bucks.





subjects : Love, Desire, Realistic & Complicated, Activities, Eating & Drinking, Relationships, Arts & Sciences, Poetry & Poets, Social Commentaries, Cities & Urban Life, Gender & Sexuality