title : Grave

author : Justin Chin

text : 
In the harsh glare of an easily
 reprehensible life. The channel changer is lost
 in the crack of an infinite sofa.
        Everything falls apart, everything breaks
 down, torn into a million
               fragments, Jericho everyday.
  
 I want to be the blameless
 victim in this canceled puppet show,
 the marionette every mother loves, the one
 souvenirs are modeled from.
  
                (In that lifetime, Elton John will write mushy ballads just 
               for me. Michael Jackson will want to be my best friend. He’d 
               take me to the Neverland Ranch, and by the llama feeding trough, 
               he’d say something like, “You’re a great guy, don’t give up, 
               stay positive!” And I’d say, “Michael, you fucking idiot, I am 
               positive!” And he’d say, “Oh, you’re so funny! Would you like 
               to touch Bubbles?”
               And I would.)
  
 In the crux of my hollow innocent youth,
 I believed that my teddy bears had feelings.
        To cure me of this, my guardians made me give
 them to the church missionaries’ children.
 Scrubbed-clean rosy-cheeked blonde kids who smelled
 of sweat and talc, who were in constant
 wide-blue-eyed bewilderment as to why
 they were profusely perspiring in the tropics,
 instead of living out some winter wonderland Bobsey Twins
 fantasy, who were oblivious 
 to their parents’ desperate efforts
 to save the dusky masses, ignorant enough
 to believe in the secret lives of stuffed animals.
                I could not eat animal crackers
 because I did not want to hurt the poor things;
 but, braised the right way, I could eat
 any part of a pig, starting with the head,
 working on the soft flesh around the eyes, 
 savoring its raspy tongue with a dipping
 sauce of ginger, chilies and lime.
  
 Oh blameless innocent victim.
 What measures a lifetime?
  
 I used to have this theory about how 
 much life a human body could hold.
 It all had to do with the number
 of heartbeats. Each human is assigned a number
 determined by an unknown power cascading
 over the dark waters of the unformed Earth.
  
        For some, it was a magnificently high number,
 seen only in Richie Rich comics, and for others,
 it was frightfully low, like twenty-six.
                No bargaining, no coupons,
 no White Flower Day sale, no specials. Once
 you hit your number, you croak.
                            I imagined the angels in heaven
 and the demons in hell gathering to watch
 the counters turn, like how I enjoyed watching
 the speedometer line up to a row of similar
 numbers, and especially when the row of 
 nines turned into 
                            the row of zeros.
  
 Oh blameless innocent victim.
 What measures eternity?
  
 An eternal damnation. An everlasting love.
  
 I could not imagine the night sky
 stretched out forever, so I decided that it came
 to an end at some point, by a velvet rope it ended
 and beyond that rope were row after row of cushioned seats,
        a majestic cosmic theater,
 playing every movie I can remember.
  
 I want to be able to evoke
 those blameless and innocent days, to revel
 in their ignorance and goodness
 as if they have the power
        to protect and to heal,
 and to strengthen,
 and to bring me to safety
        long after all other resources
                were exhausted.
  
 But I emerge anew in the wreckage,
 blinking in the sunlight,
  
 the residue of salt water in my belly.
  
 You know what they say,
 God never closes a door before making sure
 that the windows are barricaded
 and the fire escape is inaccessible.
  
 I used to know how to stop the revolution of planets.
  
 I used to know how to save the world.
  
 Now, I don’t know anything anymore.





subjects : Living, Youth, Coming of Age, Disappointment & Failure, Relationships, Home Life, Social Commentaries, Popular Culture