title : Dream: The Night of December 23rd ﻿

author : Michael McClure

text : 
for Jane ﻿
—ALL  HUGE LIKE GIANT FLIGHTLESS KIWIS TWICE THE
                                                                          SIZE OF OSTRICHES,
                           they turned and walked away from us
                  and you were there Jane and you were twenty-two
                         but this was the nineteen-forties,
                    in Wichita, near the edge of town, in a field
                   surrounded by a copse of cottonwoods. It was 
                     getting dark and the trees around the bridge
                        almost glowed like a scene by Palmer.
            The two Giant Birds—Aepyorni—from Madagascar,
                extincted A.D. one thousand, turned and walked
            from us across the bridge. Even in the semi-darkness
                    the softness of their brown feathers made
                  curls pliant as a young mother’s hair. There
          was a sweet submission in the power of their enormous
                   legs (giant drumsticks). Their tiny heads
                   (in proportion to their bodies) were bent
           utterly submerged in their business and sweeping
          side to side as a salmon does—or as a wolf does—
              but with a Pleistocene, self-involved gentleness
                 beyond our ken. My heart rose in my chest
                     (as the metaphysical poets say “with
                    purple wings of joy.”) to see them back
               in life again. We both looked, holding hands,
                      and I felt your wide-eyed drinking-in 
  
 of things.
                 Then I turned and viewed across the darkening
              field and there was a huge flightless hunting fowl
                   (the kind that ate mammals in the Pliocene).
           He stood on one leg in the setting sun by the sparkling
                stream that cut across the meadow to the bridge.
  
             He had a hammer head and curled beak, and after my
                  initial surge of fear to see the field was dotted,
             populated, by his brethren, each standing in the setting
  
                         sun, I saw their stately nobility
  
                                                                               and again
  
 the self-involvement.
  
                                    We followed the Aepyorni
  
                       across the old wooden bridge made of huge
                timbers. The bridge was dark from the shadows
                      of the poplars and the evergreens there.
               The stream was dimpled with flashing moonlight
  
                         —and I think it had a little song.
  
                                                                                   Then
  
               I found that on the bridge we were among
               a herd of black Wildebeests—Black Gnus.
            One was two feet away—turned toward me—
                 looking me eye-into-eye. There was primal
                     wildness in the upstanding coarse (not
                         sleek as it really is in Africa) fur on
                 the knobby, powerful-like-buffalo shoulders.
                  (Remember this is a dream.) I passed by him
            both afraid and unafraid of wildness as I had passed
     through the herd of zebras at the top of Ngorongoro Crater
         in front of the lodge, where from the cliff we could see
             a herd of elephants like ants, and the soda lake
                     looked pink because of flamingos there.
                         There is an essence in fear overcome
                 and I overcame fright in passing those zebras
  
                      and this black Wildebeest.
  
                                                             Then we passed
  
                   over the heavy bridge and down a little trail
                   on the far side of the meadow, walking back
  
                   in the direction we had been.
  
                                                                    Soon we came
  
                        to a cottage of white clapboards
           behind a big white clapboard house and knocked
              on the door; it was answered by a young man
   with long hair who was from the Incredible String Band.
           He took us inside and he played an instrument
               like a guitar and he danced as he played it.
           The lyre-guitar was covered with square plastic
                 buttons in rows of given sizes and shapes.
               The instrument would make any sound, play
                  any blues, make any creature sound, play
                              any melody…I wanted it
                      badly—it was a joy. My chest rose.
                I figured I’d have to, and would be glad to,
                   give twenty or thirty thousand for it…
                               Then the dream broke
               and I was standing somewhere with Joanna
                 to the side of a crowd of people by a wall
                 of masonry and I reached into my mouth
                   and took from my jaw (all the other
         persons vanished and I was the center of everything)
                         a piece which was eight teeth
                       fused together. I stared at them
                wondering how they could all be one piece.
                 They were white…It was some new fossil.
         Down on the bone there were indentations like rivulets
                     like the flowing patterns of little rivers.





subjects : Living, The Mind, Activities, Travels & Journeys, Relationships, Men & Women