title : February Snow

author : Francisco Aragón

text : 
The tint of the sky between sunset and night.
  
 And wandering with you and your nephew
 in that maze, half-lost—Madrid
 of the Austrias—looking for Plaza of the Green
  
 Cross where, days before you arrived,
 an Opel with false plates was parked, its wheels
 straddling the curb, and so the van
  
 heading for the barracks that morning
 had to slow to squeeze
 past . . . Back at the hotel your mom
  
 is holding up her gift—Amethyst, she says
 admiring how light
 when passing through a prism
  
 bends. At his window that morning before we began
 my student said, ¡Qué bonito!, watching it drift
 and descend, settling on roofs and cars.
  
 And I think of you and your wife
 and daughter: getting to see Madrid
 in white, your visit winding down, and how
  
 I had wanted that lesson to end
 to get to the park—Retiro, they say, is the city’s
 one lung, and the way the feel and sound of steps
  
 cease
 when grass is completely covered
 as if walking on a cloud. The year before
  
 on a visit from the coast, a friend
 sitting at a window
 watched the flakes flutter
  
 and fall, dissolving before reaching
 the ground—aguanieve, he said
 while from a town near Seville
  
 B-52s were lifting off . . .
 I was in a trance that week
 though like most things the war
  
 in the Gulf was soon another
 backdrop, like the string of car bombs
 the following year. And yet that morning
  
 as soon as I heard, something led me
 not to the park but down
 to City Hall, workers in the street
  
 evacuated, sipping coffee, though I never reached
 the site—of course it was cordoned
 off, the spray of glass, the heap
  
 of twisted metal, and so later learned their names
 their lives. Of the five
 there was one: a postal clerk who
  
 as a boy, would plunge his hands
 into the white, the cold
 a sweet jolt
  
 whenever he got to touch
 the stuff, scooping
 it tightly into a ball
  
 like the ones he would dodge and throw
 years later
 at his wife-to-be: those weekends,
  
 those places—away from city air—
 a release . . . Miraflores, Siete
 Picos, Rascafría . . . It’s in
  
 his blood, she would come to say
 chatting with a neighbor
 about his thing for snow—the way it falls
  
 softly, blanketing roofs
 and groves, villages
 nestled in the Sierra’s
  
 hills: it is February
 and she is picturing him
 and the boy, up there now
  
 playing, horsing around





subjects : Activities, Travels & Journeys, Relationships, Family & Ancestors, Friends & Enemies, Nature, Weather, Winter, Social Commentaries, History & Politics, Popular Culture, War & Conflict