title : Beech Forest

author : Stephen Sandy

text : 
Light from the ugliest lamp I ever saw, here
 on the table that triples for reading, eating (can’t say
 dining), business on the phone; ugliest except
 a few around the corner in that guest house at windows
  
 —plaster driftwood; cylinders like rockets or sanitary
 napkins propping shades; thin torso of a youth;
 red globe on orange globe, the works, somebody’s
 collection. Wouldn’t she love this one, lump of lamp base
  
 intending landscape, two donkeys in mustard glaze,
 heads ruefully down, one carrying two rush panniers
 large enough to hold your pens or salts and peppers; on
 the other a shifty man with droopy moustache rides,
  
 **
  
 grumping under his sombrero; right leg broken
 off at the knee, left leg clipped at ankle. They make
 no progress, this mold-made work—the joins, arthritic
 ridges where dabs of grayish green suggest
  
 a wizened bush from which a brass post rises
 to hold a shade that doesn’t fit and twice
 has tried to burn, as crusty sores at the rim show.
 Still, it lights my work. Why hate it? Do I care?
  
 These indecorous furnishings stand for failure, are
 a clutter that weighs down, defeats the purpose,
 like dumbbells taken along on vacations; the pen jar;
 lamp base, sextant, portable folding triptych.
  
 **
  
 The writing table fills with clutter. Specials
 coax me to nudge buying into play. A checkout
 coupon lets me get some brand of lunch meats
 fifty-five cents off if I spend two dollars
  
 but I just can’t find it when I’m shopping, the ticket—
 with its rubric of good news and inscrutable forest
 of bar code, black on red—to lead me on; back home
 there it is, on the table, laying waste my power to spend.
  
 What I have wanted (with Larkin) to do must be
 “essentially undoable, it belongs to the imagination.”
 Rather, the demolition has begun, piss and shit
 and blood mix in the snow-white bowl; and yet
  
 **
  
 I find the Beech Forest (behind the beach
 dunes) that Allen recommended “without
 reservation.” The man was right—it more
 than satisfies, these beech ponds and their dune
  
 forest. I sat on a pitch pine that had blown
 over and then turned round and risen again,
 and bowed part making a seat something like
 a saddle; the tree was growing while I sat on it
  
 as were the other pitch pines round the pond ruddy
 in afternoon, late light of day, rough trunks
 with tufts of twisted branches green with needles,
 it was idyllic, wind speaking through the pines,
  
 **
  
 solitude:—O, yes, two high-breasted girls
 came striding by, I heard them coming, I
 heard them going, yammering at full volume
 not looking left or right, they passed me, were
  
 out of sight and soon of earshot, Doppler effect 
 caused by exuberant youth in oblivious chitchat.
 And people are smoking in these dry woods too,
 not policing their butts is how I know,
  
 the butts will surface from the heavier, sifting sand,
 sand spilling, surfing down hills, crashing in waves
 over the path here. But call it solitude,
 when a thought—but wait! I thought—I should not be
  
 **
  
 having a thought here, this moment: yet a vision
 of a Chinese poet in his study overlooking
 such a pond as this arrives out of the silence
 like the yellow water lilies on the water, pads
  
 spreading out in files like a design on the broadloom
 of a lobby. The sage is working on a poem, brushing it
 on silk, inspired by a blend of Tao and 
 Confucius. Doubtless he would not forget 
  
 allusions to Sung poets, if he were not
 a Sung poet himself, in which case he would have to
 echo Han or T’ang; and he would be writing
 of solitude; time passing; absent friends
  
 **
  
 (enlightenment would have to be inferred).
 No matter, I didn’t bring a pen today.
 However, over there are inkberry bushes, so
 with a reed I just might make a start. . . . Farther
  
 on the path I listen to a bird, a warbler perhaps,
 I do not know the song or see the bird.
 There with the pines and sand and birdsong, and no
 prayer- or guide- or selfhelp-book, no
  
 serious commune, the mind must yearn to be 
 led on; it wants a deity, an altar to approach;
 an altar at least to take steps toward; occasion
 to rise to—with nothing planned for the mind,
  
 **
  
 it’s like a person suddenly blind, not blind
 for a long time and knowing the ropes, but just
 now, rope-stung, blind—and groping, feeling around
 for the way, any way, or, closer to home,
  
 when the power goes at night just getting from
 here to there even though you know the drill, 
 —you never find the batteries when you need them,
 groping down cellar for the circuit breaker then
  
 you flip it; nothing, it’s a bigger failure you are part of—
 know the layout in general yet without ceremony
 the mind leans forward, over an edge, hoping for,
 needing a little ritual, like a guide rail to keep it
  
 **
  
 from falling, going down. Even then the mind
 finds need of other news, keeps on desiring
 alterity somewhere at hand. For example,
 walking the streets of Provincetown, nothing to see
  
 but lots to look at, all that fluff and buff,
 the Michelin-man day-trippers aching along;
 suddenly I want a prayer book, maybe not
 Bottles and Stools or The Little Red Book but still . . .
  
 even a pocket copy of A Shropshire Lad,
 such as I find soon after all the buff and fluff
 at Tim’s, the only bookstore on the street,
 handy for quick reads. Thin as a shortbread biscuit,
  
 **
  
 THE RICHARDS PRESS LONDON 1915, no doubt
 with its khaki cover, intended for some Tommy’s
 backpack, a backward solace for off-duty hours
 in the trenches: admittedly not very much
  
 on the other hand just the thing I’m talking after;
 a talisman perhaps is all, an amulet
 with words that say, buck up, come on, you’ll make it,
 there’s something on after all this, no matter
  
 what the words say. Housman’s “vision,” his drear
 anguish of love for someone, something, lad
 and landscape that never were, that might shoot threads
 of gold among the bloody muslins and the mud;
  
 ** 
  
 mind wants other news than what the ruffled senses
 bring data of—smoke or flesh or birdsong.
 It saw there was a space within, reserved
 for turning toward another; other; that
  
 no bullet, arrowwood or beach plum might 
 fill, though these could occupy that space
 a moment.
                     Again I heard the casual chirping
 of that bird, off in that tupelo, the song
  
 I did not know, below the cries of gull
 and jay I did. The unknown I saw was not
 enough to satisfy; or—satisfied when it
 was framed, complement of what is known for sure.
  
 **
  
 It’s—like—when you go someplace strange, new,
 the seashore, any boundary, you want to learn the names
 of plants. Start looking at the edges of leaves. It gives 
 a grip on where you are, and who, or seems to,
  
 to know bullbrier, bearberry, blueberry. You get a GUIDE
 or a local to tell. On the dune path I found one, a gnarled
 bush alone, hollylike but succulent leaf; nothing
 like it in the book. But why feel helped in nature
  
 by a name? When a horde of flower children wanted
 to know what they should do to be saved (back when)
 Snyder told them, “learn the names of plants;
 of animals; learn to do something with your hands.”
  
 **
  
 Well I went out to that dune again: to cop a copy
 of the leaf I took and lost: so it’s only bayberry
 after all; dioecious, two-sexed: some leaves different
 from others, that’s OK only one got pictured
  
 in my book; but the waxiness, bayberry for sure, set
 to be rendered into candles for a gifte shoppe,
 nauseating noose of “scents.” Its nutlets twinkle
 near the oily leaves aglow above the sand,
  
 bone white. Doesn’t make me feel better to know now
 about that scrawny straggler. Sanctimonious 
 pilgrim know-alls, Bradford & Co.! Forest
 into desert, just like that. No time flat, considering.





subjects : Nature, Trees & Flowers, Arts & Sciences, Poetry & Poets, Reading & Books, Social Commentaries, Town & Country Life