title : Royal

author : Joshua Clover

text : 
They moved across the screen like a computer simulation.
 They moved across the screen like complex models & we learned
                                       to call this a nature show.
 Animals but set in gray shades for video capture with a lighter area for
      the face.
 Almost white they moved across the screen like a compressed
      meditation.
 But the song was never familiar.
 Because this was the only room this was the only room where we
      undressed—:
                                       that was the plot.
 They moved across the screen across the room but it was not happening
      to us.
 The image burning in.
 Coated with hair & then a lighter area for the face meaning exposed
      skin.
 We have learned to wear the architecture despite the sky’s numerous
      advances.
 All these things—the speed & the music & the room—happened but 
      not enough.
 We undressed in the room we could not take off where I handcuffed
      you to the story.
 This is the work of the brain—itself a bloody spring or electric wire
                                       ﻿wrapped in ripe gray gauze—
                                       ﻿you like it.
 (2 lobes resembling the holy tablets delivered into the veldt’s dry
      speed—the Laws
                                       ﻿prefigured in the neutral network’s burning thicket.)
 They moved across the screen howling but the sound turned down.
 This happened over & over again—the blue light leaking into the
      room like sand.
 Burning into the brain in a finery of filamental fire.
 The Laws which do not unravel into noise & make a kind of story of
      kinked plot
                                       ﻿which can’t be straightened like a motel wire
                                       ﻿hanger looped around your wrists.
 The loop like a computer simulation—the thought of the thought—
                                       ﻿the image burning in now.
 We began to understand what they were—:
                                       ﻿the Thou & the shalt & the not





subjects : Living, The Mind, Social Commentaries, Popular Culture