title : First Encounter Beach

author : Alison Hawthorne Deming

text : 
Eastham, Massachusetts ﻿
One of the spectators is disappointed
 there isn’t a guide to explain
 the beaching, the scientists busy
 cutting into ninety-four pilot whales
 stranded on the salt grass.
 No one knows why and, try as the rescue team
 might, not one whale will go back to water.
 So they’re injected to speed up the dying,
  
 lined up like lumber and sawed into,
 except when the black skin splits
 we can’t stop staring, their meat is so read.
 I don’t want to know why this happens—
 what parasite or geomagnetic anomaly
 finished their love of motion. Why should
 anything have to leave this world
 when water can cycle from atmosphere
 down to land, the ocean and back
 to forgiving sky.
  
                                       I’m on my way to Connecticut
 where my father has a little vegetation
 on his heart valve—that’s how the intern
 describes it, trying to minimize
 the danger of him slipping
 into a haze so cold, some nights,
 bone-cold, his hand can’t get from
 his plate to his mouth.
  
                                                   Rain slicks the highway
 slowing me down. The same water
 fattened into snow in the woods
 of my childhood, the whiteness
 unbroken except where my father
 cut trails and taught me to ski,
 laying down the herringbone behind him
 as he broke up hills that left me
 with legs made of slush. He wanted me strong,
 no patience for pain. No choice
 but to find the muscle to follow. Even now
 when he boasts how I zigzagged
 the breakneck hills in an icestorm,
 there’s no hint of my knee-chattering fear,
 slats skittering out of control,
 each run a victory of luck more than will,
 each ride up the lift a prayer for my bones.
 I wonder how it is for him now
 there in the ward where whiteness can’t hide
 the cold blank that’s ahead. When the whales
 beached, spectators came like pilgrims,
 each new arrival scanning the faces
 of those heading back to their cars
 to see how it changed them
 to survey so much death. Nothing showed.
 Their eyes followed the asphalt,
 heads bent in private devotion.
  
                                                     There in a room
 where others have died, my father
 keeps a record of each test and drug.
 He watches medicine drip into his arm
 and circle in the dark of his blood.
 I believe it will heal him, as I believe
 in the strength of my blood
 to protect me from failures of will. Once
 when my grandmother at ninety-six
 lay delirious with pneumonia,
 pitching on her high horsehair bed,
 she saw three crows perched on the dresser.
  
               They smell so awful, she said.
 Please, open the window. Let them out.
 It was my father who did what she asked.
 And the crows flew out, carrying her fever
 over the treeline, dissolving into sky,
 and she lived. Whatever she saw,
 by love, luck or dumb Yankee will,
 it was true. That’s what I mean by medicine. ﻿




subjects : Living, Death, Health & Illness, The Body, The Mind, Relationships, Family & Ancestors, Nature, Animals