title : The Visible World

author : Jorie Graham

text : 
I dig my hands into the absolute. The surface
                                                                  breaks
 into shingled, grassed clusters; lifts.
 If I press, pick-in with fingers, pluck,
 I can unfold the loam. It is tender. It is a tender
 maneuver, hands making and unmaking promises.
 Diggers, forgetters. . . . A series of successive single instances . . .
 Frames of reference moving . . .
 The speed of light, down here, upthrown, in my hands:
 bacteria, milky roots, pilgrimages of spores, deranged 
                                                                  and rippling
 mosses. What heat is this in me
 that would thaw time, making bits of instance
                                                                    overlap
 shovel by shovelful—my present a wind blowing through
                                                                          this culture
 slogged and clutched-firm with decisions, overridings,
                                                                      opportunities
 taken? . . . If I look carefully, there in my hand, if I
                                                      break it apart without
 crumbling: husks, mossy beginnings and endings, ruffled
                                                                            airy loambits,
 and the greasy silks of clay crushing the pinerot
                                                                             in . . .
 Erasure. Tell me something and then take it back.
 Bring this pellucid moment—here on this page now
                                                        as on this patch
 of soil, my property—bring it up to the top and out
                                                                                of
 sequence. Make it dumb again—won’t you?—what 
                                                                      would it
 take? Leach the humidities out, the things that will
                                                                          insist on
 making meaning. Parch it. It isn’t hard: just take this
                                                                           shovelful
 and spread it out, deranged, a vertigo of single
                                                                      clots
 in full sun and you can, easy, decivilize it, un-
                                                                 hinge it
 from its plot. Upthrown like this, I think you can
                                                              eventually
 abstract it. Do you wish to?
 Disentangled, it grows very very clear.
 Even the mud, the sticky lemon-colored clay
 hardens and then yields, crumbs.
 I can’t say what it is then, but the golden-headed
                                                    hallucination,
 mating, forgetting, speckling, inter-
                                            locking,
 will begin to be gone from it and then its glamorous
                                                                             veil of
 echoes and muddy nostalgias will
 be gone. If I touch the slender new rootings they show me
                                                                             how large I
 am, look at these fingers—what a pilot—I touch, I press
                                                                          their slowest
 electricity. . . . What speed is it at?
 What speed am I at here, on my knees, as the sun traverses now
                                                                                  and just begins
 to touch my back. What speed where my fingers, under the
                                                                               dark oaks,
 are suddenly touched, lit up—so white as they move, the ray for
                                                                                          a moment
 on them alone in the small wood.
 White hands in the black-green glade,
 opening the muddy cartoon of the present, taking the tiny roots
                                                                                         of the moss
 apart, hired hands, curiosity’s small army, so white
                                                         in these greens—
 make your revolution in the invisible temple,
 make your temple in the invisible
 revolution—I can’t see the errands you run, hands gleaming
                                                             for this instant longer
 like tinfoil at the bottom here of the tall
                                       whispering oaks . . .
 Listen, Boccioni the futurist says a galloping horse
                                                                has not four
 legs (it has twenty)—and “at C there is no sequence
 because there is no time”—and since
 at lightspeed, etc. (everything is simultaneous): my hands
 serrated with desires, shoved into these excavated
                                                                            fates
 —mauve, maroons, gutters of flecking golds—
 my hands are living in myriad manifestations
                                                        of light. . . .
 “All forms of imitation are to be despised.”
 “All subjects previously used must be discarded.”
 “At last we shall rush rapidly past objectiveness” . . .
 Oh enslavement, will you take these hands
                                        and hold them in
 for a time longer? Tops of the oaks, do you see my tiny
                                                                       golden hands
 pushed, up to the wrists,
 into the present? Star I can’t see in daylight, young, light
                                                                      and airy star—
 I put the seed in. The beam moves on.




subjects : Living, The Body, The Mind, Time & Brevity, Nature, Arts & Sciences, Philosophy, Reading & Books