title : Falling Water

author : John Koethe

text : 
I drove to Oak Park, took two tours,
 And looked at some of the houses.
 I took the long way back along the lake.
 The place that I came home to—a cavernous
 Apartment on the East Side of Milwaukee—
 Seems basically a part of that tradition,
 With the same admixture of expansion and restraint:
 The space takes off, yet leaves behind a nagging
 Feeling of confinement, with the disconcerting sense
 That while the superficial conflicts got resolved,
 The underlying tensions brought to equilibrium,
 It isn’t yet a place in which I feel that I can live.
 Imagine someone reading. Contemplate a man
 Oblivious to his settings, and then a distant person
 Standing in an ordinary room, hemmed in by limitations,
 Yet possessed by the illusion of an individual life
 That blooms within its own mysterious enclosure,
 In a solitary space in which the soul can breathe
 And where the heart can stay—not by discovering it,
 But by creating it, by giving it a self-sustaining
 Atmosphere of depth, both in the architecture,
 And in the unconstructed life that it contains.
 In a late and very brief remark, Freud speculates
 That space is the projection of a “psychic apparatus”
 Which remains almost entirely oblivious to itself;
 And Wright extols “that primitive sense of shelter”
 Which can turn a house into a refuge from despair.
 I wish that time could bring the future back again
 And let me see things as they used to seem to me
 Before I found myself alone, in an emancipated state—
 Alone and free and filled with cares about tomorrow.
 There used to be a logic in the way time passed
 That made it flow directly towards an underlying space
 Where all the minor, individual lives converged.
 The moments borrowed their perceptions from the past
 And bathed the future in a soft, familiar light
 I remembered from home, and which has faded.
 And the voices get supplanted by the rain,
 The nights seem colder, and the angel in the mind
 That used to sing to me beneath the wide suburban sky
 Turns into dreamwork and dissolves into the air,
 While in its place a kind of monument appears,
 Magnificent in isolation, compromised by proximity
 And standing in a small and singular expanse—
 As though the years had been a pretext for reflection,
 And my life had been a phase of disenchantment—
 As the faces that I cherished gradually withdraw,
 The reassuring settings slowly melt away,
 And what remains is just a sense of getting older.
 In a variation of the parable, the pure of heart
 Descend into a kingdom that they never wanted
 And refused to see. The homely notions of the good,
 The quaint ideas of perfection swept away like
 Adolescent fictions as the real forms of life
 Deteriorate with manically increasing speed,
 The kind man wakes into a quiet dream of shelter,
 And the serenity it brings—not in reflection,
 But in the paralyzing fear of being mistaken,
 Of losing everything, of acquiescing in the
 Obvious approach (the house shaped like a box;
 The life that can’t accommodate another’s)—
 As the heart shrinks down to tiny, local things.
  
 Why can’t the more expansive ecstasies come true?
 I met you more than thirty years ago, in 1958,
 In Mrs. Wolford’s eighth grade history class.
 All moments weigh the same, and matter equally;
 Yet those that time brings back create the fables
 Of a happy or unsatisfying life, of minutes
 Passing on the way to either peace or disappointment—
 Like a paper calendar on which  it’s always autumn
 And we’re back in school again; or a hazy afternoon
 Near the beginning of October, with the World Series
 Playing quietly on the radio, and the windows open,
 And the California sunlight filling up the room.
 When I survey the mural stretched across the years
 —Across my heart—I notice mostly small, neglected
 Parts of no importance to the whole design, but which,
 In their obscurity, seem more permanent and real.
 I see the desks and auditorium, suffused with
 Yellow light connoting earnestness and hope that
 Still remains there, in a space pervaded by a 
 Soft and supple ache too deep to contemplate—
 As though the future weren’t real, and the present
 Were amorphous, with nothing to hold on to,
 And the past were there forever. And the art
 That time inflicts upon its subjects can’t 
 Eradicate the lines sketched out in childhood, 
 Which harden into shapes as it recedes.
 I wish I knew a way of looking at the world
 That didn’t find it wanting, or of looking at my
 Life that didn’t always see a half-completed
 Structure made of years and filled with images
 And gestures emblematic of the past, like Gatsby’s
 Light, or Proust’s imbalance on the stones.
 I wish there were a place where I could stay
 And leave the world alone—an enormous stadium
 Where I could wander back and forth across a field
 Replete with all the incidents and small details
 That gave the days their textures, that bound the
 Minutes into something solid, and that linked them
 All together in a way that used to seem eternal.
 We used to go to dances in my family’s ancient
 Cadillac, which blew up late one summer evening
 Climbing up the hill outside Del Mar. And later
 I can see us steaming off the cover of the Beatles’
 Baby-butcher album at your house in Mission Bay;
 And three years later listening to the Velvet
 Underground performing in a roller skating rink.
 Years aren’t texts, or anything like texts;
 And yet I often think of 1968 that way, as though
 That single year contained the rhythms of the rest,
 As what began in hope and eagerness concluded in
 Intractable confusion, as the wedding turned into a
 Puzzling fiasco over poor John Godfrey’s hair.
 The parts were real, and yet the dense and living
 Whole they once composed seems broken now, its
 Voice reduced to disembodied terms that speak to me
 More distantly each day, until the tangled years
 Are finally drained of feeling, and collapse into a 
 Sequence of the places where we lived: your parents’
 House in Kensington, and mine above the canyon:
 Then the flat by Sears in Cambridge, where we
 Moved when we got married, and the third floor
 Of the house on Francis Avenue, near Harvard Square;
 The big apartment in Milwaukee where we lived the 
 Year that John was born, and last of all the
 House in Whitefish Bay, where you live now
 And all those years came inexplicably undone
 In mid-July. The sequence ended late last year.
 Suppose we use a lifetime as a measure of the world
 As it exists for one. Then half of mine has ended,
 While the fragment which has recently come to be
 Contains no vantage point from which to see it whole.
 I think that people are the sum of their illusions,
 That the cares that make them difficult to see
 Are eased by distance, with their errors blending
 In an intricate harmony, their truths abiding 
 In a subtle “spark” or psyche (each incomparable,
 Yet each the same as all the others) and their
 Disparate careers all joined together in a tangled
 Moral vision whose intense, meandering design
 Seems lightened by a pure simplicity of feeling,
 As in grief, or in the pathos of a life
 Cut off by loneliness, indifference or hate,
 Because the most important thing is human happiness—
 Not in the sense of private satisfactions, but of
 Lives that realize themselves in ordinary terms
 And with the quiet inconsistencies that make them real.
 The whole transcends its tensions, like the intimate
 Reflections on the day that came at evening, whose
 Significance was usually overlooked, or misunderstood,
 Because the facts were almost always unexceptional.
 Two years ago we took our son to Paris. Last night
 I picked him up and took him to a Lou Reed show,
 And then took him home. I look at all the houses as I
 Walk down Hackett Avenue to work. I teach my classes,
 Visit friends, cook introspective meals for myself,
 Yet in the end the minutes don’t add up. What’s lost
 Is the perception of the world as something good
 And held in common; as a place to be perfected
 In the kinds of everyday divisions and encounters
 That endowed it with integrity and structure,
 And that merged its private moments with the past.
 What broke it into pieces? What transformed the 
 Flaws that gave it feeling into objects of a deep and
 Smoldering resentment—like coming home too early,
 Or walking too far ahead of you on the rue Jacob?
 I wish that life could be a window on the sun,
 Instead of just this porch where I can stand and
 Contemplate the wires that lace the parking lot
 And feel it moving towards some unknown resolution.
 The Guggenheim Museum just reopened. Tonight I
 Watched a segment of the news on PBS—narrated by a 
 Woman we met years ago at Bob’s—that showed how
 Most of Wright’s interior had been restored,
 And how the ramp ascends in spirals towards the sky.
 I like the houses better—they flow in all directions,
 Merging with the scenery and embodying a milder,
 More domestic notion of perfection, on a human scale
 That doesn’t overwhelm the life that it encloses.
 Isn’t there a way to feel at home within the
 Confines of this bland, accommodating structure
 Made of souvenirs and emblems, like the hammock
 Hanging in the backyard of an undistinguished
 Prairie School house in Whitefish Bay—the lineal,
 Reduced descendant of the “Flameproof” Wright house
 Just a block or two away from where I live now?
 I usually walk along the street on Sunday,
 Musing on how beautiful it seems, how aspects of it
 Recapitulate the Oak Park house and studio, with
 Open spaces buried in a labyrinthine interior,
 And with the entrance half-concealed on the side—
 A characteristic feature of his plans that made it
 Difficult to find, although the hope was that in
 Trying to get inside, the visitor’s eye would come to 
 Linger over subtleties he might have failed to see—
 In much the way that in the course of getting older,
 And trying to reconstruct the paths that led me here,
 I found myself pulled backwards through these old,
 Uncertain passages, distracted by the details,
 And meeting only barriers to understanding why the
 Years unfolded as they did, and why my life
 Turned out the way it has—like his signature
 “Pathway of Discovery,” with each diversion
 Adding to the integrity of the whole.
  
 There is this sweep life has that makes the 
 Accidents of time and place seem small.
 Everything alters, and the personal concerns 
 That love could hold together for a little while
 Decay, and then the world seems strange again,
 And meaningless and free. I miss the primitive
 Confusions, and the secret way things came to me
 Each evening, and the pain. I still wonder
 Where the tears went, standing in my room each day
 And quietly inhabiting a calm, suspended state
 Enveloped by the emptiness that scares and thrills me,
 With the background noise cascading out of nothing
 Like a song that makes the days go by, a song
 Incorporating everything—not into what it says,
 But simply in the way it touches me, a single
 Image of dispersal, the inexhaustible perception
 Of contingency and transience and isolation.
 It brings them back to me. I have the inwardness
 I think I must have wanted, and the quietude,
 The solitary temper, and this space where I can
 Linger with the silence curling all around me
 Like the sound of pure passage, waiting here
 Surrounded by the furniture, the books and lists
 And all these other emblems of the floating world,
 The prints of raindrops that begin as mist, that fall
 Discreetly through the atmosphere, and disappear.
 And then I feel them in the air, in a reserved,
 More earthly music filled with voices reassembling
 In a wellspring of remembrance, talking to me again,
 And finding shelter in the same evasive movements
 I can feel in my own life, cloaked in a quiet
 Dignity that keeps away the dread of getting old,
 And fading out of other people’s consciousness,
 And dying –with its deepest insecurities and fears
 Concealed by their own protective colorations,
 As the mind secretes its shell and calls it home.
 It has the texture of an uncreated substance,
 Hovering between the settings it had come to love
 And some unformulated state I can’t imagine—
 Waiting for the telephone to ring, obsessed with 
 Ways to occupy these wide, unstructured hours,
 And playing records by myself, and waking up alone.
 All things are disparate, yet subject to the same
 Intense, eradicating wills of time and personality,
 Like waves demolishing the walls love seemed to build
 Between our lives and emptiness, the certainty they
 Seemed to have just two or three short years ago,
 Before the anger spread its poison over everything.
 I think about the way our visions locked together
 In a nightmare play of nervousness and language,
 Living day to day inside the concentrated
 Force of that relentless argument, whose words
 Swept over us in formless torrents of anxiety, two
 People clinging to their versions of their lives
 Almost like children—living out each other’s
 Intermittent fantasies, that fed upon themselves
 As though infected by some vile, concentrated hatred;
 Who then woke up and planned that evening’s dinner.
 It’s all memories now, and distance. Miles away
 The cat is sleeping on the driveway, John’s in school,
 And sunlight filters through a curtain in the kitchen.
 Nothing really changes—the external world intrudes
 And then withdraws, and then becomes continuous again.
 I went downtown today and got a lamp with pendant
 Lanterns made of opalescent art glass—part, I guess,
 Of what this morning’s paper called the “Wright craze.”
 I like the easy way the days go by, the parts of aging
 That have come to seem familiar, and the uneventful
 Calm that seems to settle on the house at night.
 Each morning brings the mirror’s reassuring face,
 As though the years had left the same enduring person
 Simplified and changed—no longer vaguely desperate,
 No longer torn, yet still impatient with himself
 And still restless; but drained of intricacy and rage,
 Like a mild paradox—uninteresting in its own right,
 Yet existing for the sake of something stranger.
 Now and then our life comes over me, in brief,
 Involuntary glimpses of that world that blossom
 Unexpectedly, in fleeting moments of regret
 That come before the ache, the pang that gathers
 Sharply, like an indrawn breath—a strange and 
 Thoughtful kind of pain, as though a steel
 Band had somehow snapped inside my heart.
 I don’t know. But what I do know is that 
 None of it is ever going to come to me again.
 Why did I think a person only distantly like me
 Might finally represent my life? What aspects
 Of my attitudes, my cast of mind, my inconclusive
 Way of tossing questions at the world had I
 Supposed might realize another person’s fantasies
 And turn her into someone else—who gradually became
 A separate part of me, and argued with the very 
 Words I would have used, and looked at me through
 Eyes I’d looked at as though gazing at myself?
 I guess we only realize ourselves in dreams,
 Or in these self-reflexive reveries sustaining
 All the charms that contemplation holds—until the
 Long enchantment of the soul with what it sees
 Is lifted, and it startles at a space alight with
 Objects of its infantile gaze, like people in a mall.
 I saw her just the other day. I felt a kind of 
 Comfort at her face, one tinctured with bemusement
 At the strange and guarded person she’d become—
 Attractive, vaguely friendly, brisk (too brisk),
 But no one I could think might represent my life.
 Why did I even try to see myself in what’s outside?
 The strangeness pushes it away, propels the vision
 Back upon itself, into these regions filled with 
 Shapes that I can wander through and never see,
 As though their image were inherently unreal.
 The houses on a street, the quiet backyard shade,
 The room restored to life with bric-a-brac—
 I started by revisiting these things, then slowly
 Reconceiving them as forms of loss made visible
 That balanced sympathy and space inside an
 Abstract edifice combining reaches of the past
 With all these speculations, all this artful
 Preening of the heart. I sit here at my desk,
 Perplexed and puzzled, teasing out a tangled
 Skein of years we wove together, and trying to
 Combine the fragments of those years into a poem.
 Who cares if life—if someone’s actual life—is
 Finally insignificant and small? There’s still a
 Splendor in the way it flowers once and fades
 And leaves a carapace behind. There isn’t time to
 Linger over why it happened, or attempt to make its
 Mystery come to life again and last, like someone
 Still embracing the confused perceptions of himself
 Embedded in the past, as though eternity lay there—
 For heaven’s a delusion, and eternity is in the details,
 And this tiny, insubstantial life is all there is.
 —And that would be enough, but for the reoccurring
 Dreams I often have of you. Sometimes at night
 The banished unrealities return, as though a room
 Suffused with light and poetry took shape around me.
 Pictures line the walls. It’s early summer.
 Somewhere in Remembrance of Things Past, Marcel,
 Reflecting on his years with “Albertine”—with X—
 Suggests that love is just a consciousness of distance,
 Of the separation of two lives in time and space.
 I think the same estrangement’s mirrored in each life,
 In how it seems both adequate and incomplete—part
 Day-to-day existence, part imaginary construct
 Beckoning at night, and sighing through my dreams
 Like some disconsolate chimera, or the subject
 Of a lonely, terrifying sadness; or the isolation
 Of a quiet winter evening, when the house feels empty,
 And silence intervenes. But in the wonderful
 Enclosure opening in my heart, I seem to recognize
 Our voices lilting in the yard, inflected by the
 Rhythms of a song whose words are seamless
 And whose lines are never-ending. I can almost
 See the contours of your face, and sense the
 Presence of the trees, and reimagine all of us
 Together in a deep, abiding happiness, as if the
 Three of us inhabited a fragile, made-up world
 That seemed to be so permanent, so real.
 I have this fantasy: It’s early in the evening.
 You and I are sitting in the backyard, talking.
 Friends arrive, then drinks and dinner, conversation…
  
 The lovely summer twilight lasts forever…
  
                                        What’s the use?
 What purpose do these speculations serve? What
 Mild enchantments do these meditations leave?
 They’re just the murmurs of an age, of middle age,
 That help to pass the time that they retrieve
 Before subsiding, leaving everything unchanged.
 Each of us at times has felt the future fade,
 Or seen the compass of his life diminished,
 Or realized some tangible illusion was unreal.
 Driving down to Evanston last week, I suddenly 
 Remembered driving down that road eight years ago,
 So caught up in some story I’d just finished
 That I’d missed the way the countryside was changing—
 How in place of trees there now were office towers
 And theme parks, parts of a confusingly panoply of
 Barns and discount malls transfiguring a landscape
 Filled with high, receding clouds and rows of flimsy
 Houses in what used to be a field. I thought of
 Other people’s lives, and how impossible it seemed
 To grasp them on the model of my own—as little
 Mirrors of infinity—or sense their forms of 
 Happiness, or in their minor personal upheavals
 Feel the sweep of time reduced to human scale
 And see its abstract argument made visible.
 I thought of overarching dreams of plenitude—
 How life lacks shape until it’s given one by love,
 And how each soul is both a kingdom in itself
 And part of some incorporating whole that
 Feels and has a face and lets it live forever.
 All of these seemed true, and cancelled one another,
 Leaving just the feeling of an unseen presence
 Tracing out the contours of a world erased,
Like music tracing out the contours of the mind—﻿
 For life has the form of a winding curve in space
 And in its wake the human figure disappears.
 Look at our surroundings—where a previous age
 Could visualize a landscape we see borders,
 Yet I think the underlying vision is the same:
 A person positing a world that he can see
 And can’t contain, and vexed by other people.
 Everything is possible; some of it seemed real
 Or nearly real, yet in the end it spoke to me alone,
 In phrases echoing the isolation of a meager
 Ledge above a waterfall, or rolling across a vast,
 Expanding plain on which there’s always room,
 But only room for one. It starts and ends
 Inside an ordinary room, while in the interim
 Brimming with illusions, filled with commonplace
 Delights that make the days go by, with simple
 Arguments and fears, and with the nervous
 Inkling of some vague, utopian conceit
 Transforming both the landscape and our lives,
 Until we look around and find ourselves at home,
 But in a wholly different world. And even those 
 Catastrophes that seemed to alter everything
 Seem fleeting, grounded in a natural order
 All of us are subject to, and ought to celebrate.
 —Yet why? That things are temporary doesn’t 
 Render them unreal, unworthy of regretting.
 It’s not as though the past had never happened:
 All those years were real, and their loss was real,
 And it is sad—I don’t know what else to call it.
 I’m glad that both of us seem happy. Yet what
 Troubles me is just the way what used to be a world
 Turned out, in retrospect, to be a state of mind,
 And no more tangible than that. And now it’s gone,
 And in its place I find the image of a process
 Of inexorable decay, or of some great unraveling
 That drags the houses forward into emptiness
 And backwards into pictures of the intervening days
 Love pieced together out of nothing. And I’m
 Certain that this austere vision finally is true,
 And yet it strikes me as too meager to believe.
 It comes from much too high above the world
 And seems to me too hopeless, too extreme—
 But then I found myself one winter afternoon
 Remembering a quiet morning in a classroom
 And inventing everything again, in ordinary
 Terms that seemed to comprehend a childish
 Dream of love, and then the loss of love,
 And all the intricate years between. 
 ﻿




subjects : Living, Growing Old, Separation & Divorce, Time & Brevity, Love, Break-ups & Vexed Love, Relationships, Home Life