title : Our Literary Heritage

author : L. E. Sissman

text : 
I. Riverside Drive, 1929
  
 “ ‘Good-by, Ralph. It should end some other way.
 Not this,’ Corinna said. ‘Now go away.’
 No. Rhymes. It’s ludicrous. Try ‘Dear, good-by.’
 No. Repetitious. Maybe ‘Dear, farewell.’
 No. Stagy. Out of character. Oh, hell.
 Time for a drink.” The Smith-Corona heaves
 As he retracts his knickerbockered knees 
 To rise. Outside, a southbound tug receives
 The sun broadside, and the bold Linit sign
 Pales on the Jersey shore. Fresh gin, tk-tk-
 Tk-tk-tk-tk, quite clearly fills his glass
 Half full from the unlabelled bottle. Now
 His boyish fingers grip the siphon’s worn
 Wire basketweave and press the trigger down
 To utter soda water. One long sip
 Subtracts a third of it for carrying.
 On the way back, he pauses at the door
 Beside his football picture, where a snore
 Attests that all is well and promises
 Him time to work. To work: before the tall,
 Black, idle typewriter, before the small
 Black type elitely inching on the blank
 White sea of bond, he quails and takes a drink.
 First, demolitions: the slant shilling mark
 Defaces half a hundred characters
 With killing strike-overs. Now, a new start:
 “ ‘Good-by, Ralph. I don’t know why it should end
 Like tihs,’ Corinna said. ‘But be my friend.’ ’’
  
  
 II. Hotel Shawmut, Boston, 1946
  
 (From a commercial travellers’ hotel,
 Professor S. jumped straight down into hell,
 While—jug-o’-rum-rum—engines made their way
 Beneath him, one so cold December day).
  
 While he prepares his body, cold gears mate
 And chuckle in the long draught of the street.
 He shaves; his silver spectacles peruse
 An issue of The North American Muse.
 He uses Mum; outside him in the hall,
 Maids talk their language; snow begins to fall.
 He puts on his old clothes. The narrow room
 Has nothing, nothing to discuss with him
 Except what time you should send out your suit
 And shoes for cleaning. Now he stamps his foot:
 Outside the window, not saying anything,
 Appears a seagull, standing on one wing;
 A long-awaited colleague. With glad cry,
 Professor S. embraces the white sky.
  
 While S. demolishes a taxicab,
 His spectacles review the life of Crabbe.
  
 (From a commercial travellers’ hotel,
 Profesor S. descended into hell.
 But once in April in New Haven he
 Kissed a friend’s sister in the gloom of trees.)
  
  
 III. Deus Ex Machina, Flushing, 1966
  
 La Guardia. Knee-deep in storyboards,
 I line up for the shuttle, which arrives
 Outside the gate and off-loads shuffling streams
 Of transferees—each in his uniform
 Of sober stuff and nonsense, with a case
 Of talents at his side—who pass our line
 Of somber-suited shuttlers carrying
 Our cases on. Then one appears, a rare
 Bird in migration to New York, a bare-
 Crowned singer of the stony coast of Maine,
 And of Third Avenue in rain; a bard.
 The way of the almost-extinct is hard.
 He peers through tortoise-shelly glasses at 
 The crowd, the place, the year. He is not here
 And is. In his check jacket, he describes
 An arc of back and arms as he proceeds 
 Between two city starlings, carrying
 His store of songs in a beat leather grip
 And a dried drop of his brown lamb’s blood on
 His wilted collar. A Time-reader in
 Glenurquhart plaid identifies his bird—
 “Godwit, the poet”—to a flannel friend.
 The bard stalks on on his two legs, aware
 He has been spotted; in, I’d say, some pain
 At an existence which anticipates
 Its end and in the meantime tolerates
 Intolerance of the wing, the whim, the one
 Unanswerable voice which sings alone.
  
  
 IV. Lament of the Makers, Including Me: 1967
  
 New-minted coin, my poet’s mask
 (A small denomination in
 Demotic nickel, brass, or tin)
 Passes from hand to hand to hand
 Beyond my six acres of land.
 Did I desire such currency
 Among the meritocracy
 Of tri-named ladies who preserve
 The flame of art in mackled hands,
 Of universitarians
 And decimal librarians
 Who shore and store up textual
 Addenda, of asexual
 Old arbiters and referees
 Who startle letters with a sneeze,
 Of critics whose incautious cough
 Halts a new wave or sends it off
 To break on uninhabited shores,
 Of publishers, insensual bores
 Procuring art—“A maidenhead!”—
 To Jack the Reader, of well-read
 Young underfaced admirers who
 Impinge on undefended you
 At readings in all colleges?
 No, I did not; but knowledge is
 All-powerless to seek redress
 From injuries to innocence.
 I think continually of 
 Abjurers, who, fed on self-love,
 Housed in an incommodious cave,
 Clothed in three-button sackcloth, crave
 Indulgence of no audience
 But their own laudatory ears.
 Alack, this anchoritic few
 Dwindles; these ticking times are too
 Struck with celebrity’s arrears,
 And heap past-due advances on
 The embryonic artisan;
 All hours from dawn to night are lauds,
 All auditors are all applause
 (However electronic), all
 Tempters conspire in Adam’s fall.
  
 The world turned upside-down, without
 A beast in view, without a doubt,
 Recalls its exiles and bestows
 On them the palm, the bays, the rose
 (Art sick?), the Laurel Wormser Prize,
 Whose debased dollar only buys
 More nods, more goods, more fame, more praise:
 Not art, as in the rude old days.
  
 Now worldward poets turn and say,
 Timor vitae conturbat me.




subjects : Living, Coming of Age, Time & Brevity, Activities, Jobs & Working, Arts & Sciences, Humor & Satire, Poetry & Poets, Reading & Books, Social Commentaries, Popular Culture