title : Wall, Cave, and Pillar Statements, after Asôka

author : Alan Dugan

text : 
In order to perfect all readers
 the statements should be carved 
 on rock walls, on cave walls,
 and on the side of pillars so
 the charm of their instruction can
 affect the mountain climbers near
 the cliffs, the plainsmen near
 the pillars, and the city people near
 the caves they go to on vacations.
  
 The statements should, and in a fair
 script, spell out the right text and gloss
 of the Philosopher’s jocular remark. Text:
 “Honesty is the best policy.” Gloss:
 “He means not ‘best’ but ‘policy,’
 (this is the joke of it) whereas in fact
           Honesty is Honesty, Best
           is Best, and Policy is Policy,
           the three terms being not
           related, but here loosely allied.
 What is more important is that ‘is’
 is, but the rocklike truth of the text
 resides in the ‘the’. The ‘the’ is The.
           By this means the amusing sage
           has raised or caused to be raised
           the triple standard in stone:
 the single is too simple for life,
 the double is mere degrading hypocrisy,
 but the third combines the first two
 in a possible way, and contributes
 something unsayable of its own:
 this is the pit, nut, seed, or stone
 of the fruit when the fruit has been 
 digested:
           It is good to do good for the wrong
           reason, better to do good for the good
           reason, and best of all to do good
           good: i.e. when the doer and doee 
           and whatever passes between them
           are beyond all words like ‘grace’
           or ‘anagogic insight,’ or definitions like
           ‘particular instance of a hoped-at-law,’
 and which the rocks alone can convey.
 This is the real reason for the rock walls,
 the cave walls and pillars, and not the base
 desires for permanence and display
 that the teacher’s conceit suggests.”
  
           That is the end of the statements, but,
           in order to go on a way after the end
           so as to make up for having begun 
           after the beginning, and thus to come around
           to it in order to include the whole thing,
 add: “In some places the poignant slogan,
 ‘Morality is a bad joke like everything else,’
 may be written or not, granted that space
 exists for the vulgar remarks, the dates,
 initials and hearts of lovers, and all
 other graffiti of the prisoners of this world.”




subjects : Religion, The Spiritual, Arts & Sciences, Language & Linguistics, Philosophy