title : Chicago Poem

author : Lew Welch

text : 
I lived here nearly 5 years before I could
      meet the middle western day with anything approaching
 Dignity. It’s a place that lets you
      understand why the Bible is the way it is:
 Proud people cannot live here.
  
 The land’s too flat. Ugly sullen and big it
      pounds men down past humbleness. They
 Stoop at 35 possibly cringing from the heavy and
      terrible sky. In country like this there
 Can be no God but Jahweh.
  
 In the mills and refineries of its south side Chicago
      passes its natural gas in flames
 Bouncing like bunsens from stacks a hundred feet high.
      The stench stabs at your eyeballs.
 The whole sky green and yellow backdrop for the skeleton
      steel of a bombed-out town.
  
 Remember the movies in grammar school? The goggled men
      doing strong things in
 Showers of steel-spark? The dark screen cracking light
      and the furnace door opening with a 
 Blast of orange like a sunset? Or an orange?
  
 It was photographed by a fairy, thrilled as a girl, or
      a Nazi who wished there were people
 Behind that door (hence the remote beauty), but Sievers,
      whose old man spent most of his life in there,
 Remembers a “nigger in a red T-shirt pissing into the
      black sand.”
  
 It was 5 years until I could afford to recognize the ferocity.
      Friends helped me. Then I put some
 Love into my house. Finally I found some quiet lakes
      and a farm where they let me shoot pheasant.
  
 Standing in the boat one night I watched the lake go
      absolutely flat. Smaller than raindrops, and only
 Here and there, the feeding rings of fish were visible a hundred
      yards away — and the Blue Gill caught that afternoon
 Lifted from its northern lake like a tropical! Jewel at its ear
      Belly gold so bright you’d swear he had a
 Light in there. His color faded with his life. A small
      green fish . . .
  
 All things considered, it’s a gentle and undemanding
      planet, even here. Far gentler
 Here than any of a dozen other places. The trouble is
      always and only with what we build on top of it.
  
 There’s nobody else to blame. You can’t fix it and you
      can’t make it go away. It does no good appealing
 To some ill-invented Thunderer
      Brooding above some unimaginable crag . . .
  
 It’s ours. Right down to the last small hinge it
      all depends for its existence
 Only and utterly upon our sufferance.
  
 Driving back I saw Chicago rising in its gases and I
      knew again that never will the
 Man be made to stand against this pitiless, unparalleled
      monstrocity. It
 Snuffles on the beach of its Great Lake like a
      blind, red, rhinoceros.
 It’s already running us down.
  
 You can’t fix it. You can’t make it go away.
      I don’t know what you’re going to do about it,
 But I know what I’m going to do about it. I’m just
      going to walk away from it. Maybe
 A small part of it will die if I’m not around
  
       feeding it anymore.




subjects : Living, Life Choices, Nature, Landscapes & Pastorals, Social Commentaries, Cities & Urban Life