title : Waiting for This Story to End Before I Begin Another

author : Jan Heller Levi

text : 
All my stories are about being left,
 all yours about leaving. So we should have known.
 Should have known to leave well enough alone;
 we knew, and we didn’t. You said let’s put
 our cards on the table, your card
 was your body, the table my bed, where we didn’t
 get till 4 am, so tired from wanting
 what we shouldn’t that when we finally found our heads,
 we’d lost our minds. Love,I wanted to call you
 so fast. But so slow you could taste each
 letter licked into your particular and rose-like ear.
 L, love, for let’s wait. O, for oh no, let’s not. V
 for the precious v between your deep breasts
 (and the virtue of your fingers
 in the voluptuous center of me.)
  
 Okay, E for enough.
  
 Dawn broke, or shattered. Once we’ve made
 the promises, it’s hard to add the prefix if. . . .
 But not so wrong to try.
 That means taking a lot of walks,
 which neither of us is good at,
 for different reasons, and nights up till 2
 arguing whose reasons are better.
 Time and numbers count a lot in this. 13
 years my marriage. 5 years you my friend.
 4th of July weekend when something that begins
 in mist, by mistake (whose?), means too much
 has to end. I think we need an abacus to get our love
 on course, and one of us to oil the shining rods
 so we can keep the crazy beads clicking,
 clicking. It wasn’t a question
 of a perfect fit. Theoretically,
 it should be enough to say I left a man
 for a woman (90% of the world is content
 to leave it at that. Oh, lazy world) and when the woman
 lost her nerve, I left
 for greater concerns: when words like autonomy
 were useful, I used them, I confess. So I get
 what I deserve: a studio apartment he paid the rent on;
 bookshelves up to the ceiling she drove
 the screws for. And a skylight I sleep alone
 beneath, and two shiny quarters in my pocket
 to call one, then the other, or to call one
  
 twice. Once, twice, I threatened to leave him—
 remember? Now that I’ve done it, he says
 he doesn’t. I’m in a phonebooth at the corner of Bank
 and Greenwich; not a booth, exactly,
 but two sheets of glass to shiver between.
 This is called being street-smart: dialing
 a number that you know won’t be answered,
 but the message you leave leaves proof that you tried.
 And this, my two dearly beloveds, is this called
 hedging your bets? I fish out my other
 coin, turn it over in my fingers, press
 it into the slot. Hold it there. Let it drop.




subjects : Living, Separation & Divorce, Love, Break-ups & Vexed Love, Desire, Realistic & Complicated, Romantic Love, Relationships, Men & Women