title : Saint Stephen’s Day with the Griffins

author : Henri Cole

text : 
for Janet and Christopher
     Half-eagle, half-lion, the fabulous
           animal struts, saber-clawed but saintly,
    a candlewicked ornament dangling
 from our rickety sugar pine. Butternut
  
      pudding in our bellies. His reindeer
           and sleigh hurried here and gone—thank God
      for us childless folks. Almost:   the lovelocked
 Griffins on the sofa, sockfooted, hearing
  
      gas and a kiddy heart in her tummy—
           a life more imaginary than real,
      though one is dazzled by gold that fills
 the egg unbroken. We feed her crumpets
  
      and listen again: The lamb’s a hungry
           bugger, even snug from earth’s
      imponderable fury. Tomorrow, in a spurt
 by jet I’m home. Clumsy as a puppy
  
      I’ll scale the flightstairs into the nosecone,
           luggage banging at my sides, enter the egg-
      shaped cabin and await the infrared
 climb toward space. Tell me one
  
      thing true? If I could count the way
           things slip from us: Mother’s fur gloves,
      Sunday’s benediction, the dead gone before us,
 love’s rambler on the prairie—all displaced
  
      as we buckle in our shuttle,
           jetbound on a screaming runway,
      gravity pulling at us castaways,
 more mammal than bird, subtle
  
      leg-weary griffins made manifest,
           arrowing towards home. How do we
      ignore it: the attenuated being
 of our age, the bittersweet collapse
  
      of dominoes mooned around our pine?
            Withered with hatred from his quarter,
      Saint Stephen even at death rolled mercifully over
 in high holiness. Sonless, wifeless, nine
  
      thousand feet from land, I roll the lozenge
           on my tongue, youthful habit for ache
      of any kind, parting a survivor (Wait!),
 love rescuing me from the fringe.




subjects : Love, Activities, Travels & Journeys, Religion, Christianity, The Spiritual, Mythology & Folklore