title : The Aureole

author : Nikky Finney

text : 
(for E)

               I stop my hand midair.
  
                If I touch her there everything about me will be true.
                The New World discovered without pick or ax.
  
                I will be what Brenda Jones was stoned for in 1969.
                I saw it as a girl but didn’t know I was taking in myself.
  
                My hand remembers, treading the watery room,
                just behind the rose-veiled eyes of memory.
  
 Alone in the yard tucked beneath the hood of her car,
 lucky clover all about her feet, green tea-sweet necklace
 for her mud-pie crusty work boots.
  
 She fends off their spit & words with silent two-handed
 twists & turns of her socket wrench. A hurl of sticks &
 stones and only me to whisper for her, from sidewalk far,
  
 break my bones. A grown woman in grease-pocket overalls
 inside her own sexy transmission despite the crowding of
 hurled red hots. Beneath the hood of her candy-apple Camaro:
  
 souped, shiny, low to the ground.
  
                The stars over the Atlantic are dangling
                salt crystals. The room at the Seashell Inn is
                $20 a night; special winter off-season rate.
                No one else here but us and the night clerk,
                five floors below, alone with his cherished
                stack of Spiderman. My lips are red snails
                in a primal search for every constellation
                hiding in the sky of your body. My hand
                waits for permission, for my life to agree
                to be changed, forever. Can Captain Night
                Clerk hear my fingers tambourining you
                there on the moon? Won’t he soon climb
                the stairs and bam! on the hood of this car?
                You are a woman with film reels for eyes.
                Years of long talking have brought us to the
                land of the body. Our skin is one endless
                prayer bead of brown. If my hand ever lands,
                I will fly past dreaming Australian Aborigines.
                The old claw hammer and monkey wrench
                that flew at Brenda Jones will fly across the
                yard of ocean at me. A grease rag will be
                thrust into my painter’s pants against my
                will. I will never be able to wash or peel
                any of this away. Before the night is over
                someone I do not know will want the keys
                to my ’55 silver Thunderbird. He will chase
                me down the street. A gaggle of spooked
                hens will fly up in my grandmother’s yard,
                never to lay another egg, just as I am jump-
                ed, kneed, pulled finally to the high ground
                of sweet clover.




subjects : Living, The Body, Love, Desire, Realistic & Complicated, Relationships, Social Commentaries, Gender & Sexuality