title : For Clifford Bernel

author : Mark O'Brien

text : 
Lonnie didn’t want to eat with Clifford.
 I tried to keep my eyes away from his mouth,
 Which opened uncontrollably,
 His thick saliva oozing over him.
 And he couldn’t talk.
 So I ate my lunch with Lonnie, heard him talk
 About the dive which broke his neck, about
 His motorcycle shop in Chico, while
 Another nurse gave Clifford lunch.
  
                                                 Every day
 His parents came to push his chair around
 The grounds. A grim, determined pair;
 I wondered what disasters they had seen.
 The nurses talked with them about
 Their son. His eyes are beautiful, they said.
 One day a nurse who put her stethoscope
 To Clifford’s chest could not detect a beat.
 “His heart has stopped,” she said in quiet awe.
 The P.A. speakers cried:
 CODE BLUE, C-2, STAT! CODE BLUE, C-2, STAT!
 The doctors, nurses and technicians ran
 Into our crowded room. The squeaking
 Crash cart could not be heard above
 The urgent, human sounds the doctors made:
 A swirl of orders filled the air. “I need
 The mallet quick, goddamnit, QUICK, I said!”
 Encapsulated in my iron lung,
 I noted that doctors weren’t the calm
 Professionals portrayed by Robert Young
 And Richard Chamberlain, but people just
 As scared of death as everybody else.
 Then, they took me, iron lung and all,
 And parked me in a room
 Where women patients spend their lives.
  
 The room was quiet as a stone; no clocks
 Or television sets marked the time,
 Which passed as slowly as Moses climbing Mount Sinai,
 Until the social worker, Mrs. Mintzer,
 Came to talk to me about Shakespeare. All his tragedies,
 She said, contain a point where things begin
 To fall apart. The bold protagonist,
 No matter what his cunning, skill or strength,
 Can see his fall foreshadowed by a small
 Event. Macbeth saw Banquo at the feast
 And after that it went from bad to worse
 Until the murd’rous thane became a corpse
 Without a head. She paused to think a while.
 Now Clifford led a fairly normal life,
 She pointed out, despite his cerebral palsy.
 Playing cards and camping with his family
 Were not beyond his reach.
 The point where things fell apart occurred
 Five years ago, when he fell and broke
 His shoulder bone.
 “Clifford died,” she said.
 And tried to comfort me with her sympathy
 For my awful loss.

 I didn’t mourn his death at all.
 “Too bad he died so young,” I said,
 At twenty-three.” But all I cared about
 Was the space in my crowded room.
 The p.m. nurses took me back into my room.
 I asked one to play my tape,
 Appalachian Spring.
 She reached into my bedside stand and slipped.
 “There’s blood all over the floor, Clifford’s.
 I thought they’d cleaned up all that mess.”
  
 I spent the weekend after that in the solarium.
 I read and overheard the nurses in the next room.
 “They say he wrote exquisite poetry
 About the way he felt when people stared
 At him as if he were a freak.”
                                     
                                                 And so
 I learned of my insensitivity,
 Insensitivity so great I failed
 To recognize a person
 Caught in much the same predicament as I.
 Such numbness isolates me more
 Than any iron lung.




subjects : Living, Death, Health & Illness, The Body, The Mind, Relationships, Friends & Enemies