title : Around the Fire

author : Ted Berrigan

text : 
What I’m trying to say is that if an experience is 
proposed to me—I don’t have any particular interest 
in it—Any more than anything else. I’m interested in
 anything. Like I could walk out the door right now and go some 
where else. I don’t have any center in that sense. If you’ll look 
in my palm you’ll see that my heart and my head line are 
the same and if you’ll look in your palm you’ll see that it’s 
different. My heart and my head feel exactly the same. Me, 
I like to lay around of a Sunday and drink beer. I don’t feel 
a necessity for being a mature person in this world. I mean 
all the grown-ups in the world, they’re just playing house, all 
poets know that. How does your head feel? How I feel is 
what I think. I look at you today, & I expect you to look 
the same tomorrow. If you’re having a nervous breakdown, I’m
 not going to be looking at you like you’re going to die, because 
I don’t think you are. If you’re a woman you put yourself 
somewhere near the beginning and then there’s this other place 
you put yourself in terms of everybody. “The great cosmetic strange-
ness of the normal deep person.” Okay. Those were those people—and
 I kept telling myself, I have to be here, because I don’t have 
a country. How tight is the string? And what is on this particular 
segment of it? And the photographer, being black, and the writer, 
me, being white, fell out at this point. And he didn’t want to 
look at it—I mean it’s nothing, just some drunk Indians riding 
Jersey milk cows—but I wanted to see it, I mean it was right 
in front of my eyes and I wanted therefore to look at it. 
And death is not any great thing, it’s there or it’s not. I mean 
God is the progenitor of religious impetuousity in the human beast. 
And Davy Crockett is right on that—I mean he’s gonna shoot a bear, 
but he’s not gonna shoot a train, because the train is gonna run 
right over him. You can’t shoot the train. And I always thought 
there was another way to do that. And it is necessary to do that 
and we bear witness that it is necessary to do it. The only distinction 
between men and women is five million shits.




subjects : Living, Life Choices, Midlife, The Body, The Mind, Time & Brevity, Relationships, Men & Women, Social Commentaries, Gender & Sexuality, Race & Ethnicity