title : Something Amazing Just Happened

author : Ted Berrigan

text : 
for Jim Carroll, on his birthday
A lovely body gracefully is nodding
 Out of a blue Buffalo
                                     Monday morning
                                                                  curls
 softly rising color the air
                                          it’s yellow
 above the black plane
                                     beneath a red tensor
  
 I’ve been dreaming. The telephone kept ringing & ringing
 Clear & direct, purposeful yet pleasant, still taking pleasure
 in bringing the good news, a young man in horn-rims’ voice
                                                                                                    is speaking
 while I listen. Mr. Berrigan, he says, & without waiting for an answer
             goes on,
 I’m happy to be able to inform you that your request for
             a Guggenheim Foundation Grant
 Has been favorably received by the committee, & approved. When
             would you like to leave?
  
 Uh, not just yet, I said, uh, what exactly did I say with regards to
             leaving, in my application … I’m a little hazy at the moment.
  
 Yes. Your project, as outlined in your application for a grant for the
             purpose
 of giving Jim Carroll the best possible birthday present you could get
             him, through our Foundation, actually left the project, that is,
             how the monies
 would be spent, up to us. You indicated, wisely, I think, that we knew
             more about what kind of project we would approve than you did,
             so we should
 make one up for you, since all you wanted was money, to buy Jim a
             birthday gift.
  
 Aha! I said. So, what’s up?
  
 We have arranged for you and Jim to spend a year in London, in a
             flat off of King’s Row.
 You will receive 250 pounds a month expenses, all travel expenses
             paid, & a clothing allowance of 25 pounds each per month.
             During the year,
 At your leisure, you might send us from time to time copies of your
             London works. By year’s end I’m sure you each will have enough
             new poems for two books,
 Which we would then publish in a deluxe boxed hardcover edition,
             for the rights to which we shall be prepared to pay a considerable
             sum, as is your due.
 We feel that this inspired project will most surely result in The first
             major boxed set of works since Tom Sawyer & Huckleberry
             Finn! Innocents Abroad
 in reverse, so to speak! We know your poems, yours & Jim’s, will tell it
             like it is, & that is what we are desperate to know! So, when
             would you like to leave?
 Immediately, I shouted! & Jim! I called, Jim! Happy Birthday! Wake up!




subjects : Living, Birth & Birthdays, Relationships, Friends & Enemies, Arts & Sciences, Humor & Satire, Poetry & Poets