title : Mules and Women

author : Angela Jackson

text : 
with respect to Zora and the Ground of the African Church
Sorrowtalked eye-to-eye forgiven is no mere burden.
 The one who sings is no mere beast.
 The one who slips the harness of the horror stands alive
             as earth.
  
 Today I can watch the wind and it is blue smoke.
 I shake myself inside my dress, consider rain and choose
             Shine.
 I was walking down Mississippi River Street
             and a ghost stopped me.
 No one could see it but me,
 standing in the middle of the sidewalk
 smilin at a haint with his hat in his hand
      instead of his head when he can tote that too.
  
      When one mule die
      the rest neigh-cry
      till the wagon take the dead thing away.
  
      Mississippi River Street rampant with noise,
      radiant, won’t hold still.
      But I have walked on blue black water.
      Watched dead rise before the wagon came.
  
      Everywhere I see mules,
      open mouths sing blues, then be human, then
      beyond.
  
 Funerals, weddings, baptisms
 I take off my skin, hang it up
 like a soaked quilt to dry the tears
 and sweat from feeling. I stand naked before Church,
 holding Dr. Watts closer than my sagging, girlish breasts.
 My soul wears no clothes when she sing.
 It is all being in love with more than one
 man who is one whole man you can look into his eyes
 without blinking.
  
      Where would I go to hide?
 Dr. Watts standing with my skin hooked on his finger
 and I am next to him solid and living the song
             with no words     .
 that every born-again mule knew in death and in life
             before
 birth, now hums true again hot in the chest and throat
 breaking natural out the mouth like breathing.
  
      Where would I go to hide?
 Sit down, rock my soul like my baby and Dr. Watts
 climb in my lap and moan for the milk no mother can buy
             or borrow
 only make in hearts of her eyes, in lines of the palms
             of her hands.
 And where would I find lines with no skin?
  
      Where would I go to hide?
 I tell you I am living now. Like in Mississippi
 Grandmama’s bedroom sitting on the high bed
      you could break
           your neck leaving.
 Cousin Chubby said fried fish, greens, and cornbread was
 good eatin. I am good livin. Blue smoke watching,
 naked, haint-smiling, entertaining Dr. Watts, dreaming
 of a man with a white liver who can’t kill me,
 who love mulish women, hainted ones,
      I am the sainted one
 naked with no sense of memory but good like God rocking
 hums in my lap and looking for no hiding place even if
 wind be blue smoke hurricane and I make red milk
 in the hearts of my eyes and reach out my lifelines to
 a hopeless haint I can stand myself.
  
 Naked now, where would I want to go to hide? From this
 funeral wedding death and birth baptism
 the sliding tears washing my soul cleaner than
 Dr. Watts’ whistle or the look in a sweatin man’s
 eyes when he lookin at a perfect, brutal sun
 killing him with living while he lick his lips and dream
 of water, then put his shoulder behind a woman
 guiding him while he dig in and groove the earth
             to the quick
 deep endless quick.
  
      Where would I go
      Where would I go to hide this
      yes-crying love yielding beyond flesh yet
      subsumed by sweat
  
      Where would I go naked so
      following blues and Dr. Watts
      like a double-seeing shadow
      standing before you with only blue smoke
      between us
      humming yes and yes and yes
  
      subsumed by sweat and yielding
      beyond mere flesh.
  




subjects : Religion, Faith & Doubt, The Spiritual, Social Commentaries, Race & Ethnicity