title : Beautiful Poetry

author : Camille Guthrie

text : 
“Being so caught up  So mastered.”                                        —Yeats
I was too shy to say anything but Your poems are so beautiful.
 What kinds of things, feelings, or ideas inspire you,
 I mean, outside the raw experiences of your life?
 He turned a strange crosshatched color
 as if he stood in a clouded painting, and said, Thanks,
 but no other phenomena intrude upon my starlit mind.
  
 I see you are wondering what this is all about. Don’t mind
 me, I’m talking to myself again. Yes, poetry is nice and often beautiful,
 yet it doesn’t beget much attention, money, or even a simple thanks
 for placing the best words in the best order. That’s when I forget all about your
 incessant demands, and the restless subject leaps the stream in Technicolor—
 until the Remembrancer appears and says, Stop this wasteful life.
  
 Doctor, lawyer, thief. These fancies of yours could cost a life
 or worse, two. Meanwhile, he perceives my gifted body upholding my mind
 as I’m explaining my stuff on the Unicorn Tapestries, cheeks starting to color,
 feathers ruffling, quiet shudders. He shrugs, Your content sounds too beautiful
 but I’d like to read it sometime. Okay. He says all the right things, like I love you
 Hyacinth Girl. Things get interesting until the sudden blow: Thanks
  
 For the memories. What I’ll think seeing his new work in The New Yorker is Thanks
 for nothing, asshole, as he drops me for that prolific pastoral life
 with his wife upstate. The more I think about it, it all depends upon your
 phantom attention. Surely a world embroiders itself in one’s mind
 at any moment, words resounding, ardent present clarifyingly beautiful
 And beautifully truthful. You know? Here I should put in a lapis color
  
 Or a murky midnight blue. Or have the crowd stagger by in a riot of color
 pinning down the helpless beast with spears and ritualistic thanks
 to their gods. What one really wants to get at is the real, the eternally beautiful
 like The White Album or something. That’s what makes one perilous life
 worth living. All the brute indifference, humiliation, and failure can put one in the    
             mind
 to give up, freak out, kill somebody, heart battered, so mastered. Oh you
  
 Wherever I go, on the subway, in my cubicle, at play, in sleep, it’s always you
 of the air, overpowering my senses like a Dutch master in one pure color,
 its fiction at full speed, walls breaking, a clarity panorama for the mind
 hunting for meaning and finding it at last! Now look at all the work I did, and not
             one thanks
 Not even flowers. Off you rush to watch him accept another award in that life
 We can only dream of. From where you sit it all seems so beautiful
  
 And I finally understand you. For that I can’t express enough thanks
 As the subject is the best color for me in the difficulty of this lonely life.
 It’s always caught up in my mind, what could be more beautiful.




subjects : Living, Life Choices, Love, Realistic & Complicated, Arts & Sciences, Poetry & Poets