"God! How I hate you, you young cheerful men" 
Arthur Graeme West 
1891-1917

England
Religion, Faith & Doubt, Social Commentaries, History & Politics, War & Conflict

Blank Verse

God! How I hate you, you young cheerful men,
 Whose pious poetry blossoms on your graves

 As soon as you are in them, nurtured up
 By the salt of your corruption, and the tears
 Of mothers, local vicars, college deans,
 And flanked by prefaces and photographs
 From all you minor poet friends--the fools--
 Who paint their sentimental elegies
 Where sure, no angel treads; and, living, share
 The dead's brief immortality
                                                     Oh Christ!
 To think that one could spread the ductile wax
 Of his fluid youth to Oxford's glowing fires
 And take her seal so ill! Hark how one chants--
 "Oh happy to have lived these epic days"--
 "These epic days"! And he'd been to France,
 And seen the trenches, glimpsed the huddled dead
 In the periscope, hung in the rusting wire:
 Chobed by their sickley foetor, day and night
 Blown down his throat: stumbled through ruined hearths,
 Proved all that muddy brown monotony,
 Where blood's the only coloured thing. Perhaps
 Had seen a man killed, a sentry shot at night,
 Hunched as he fell, his feet on the firing-step,
 His neck against the back slope of the trench,
 And the rest doubled up between, his head
 Smashed like and egg-shell, and the warm grey brain
 Spattered all bloody on the parados:
 Had flashed a torch on his face, and known his friend,
 Shot, breathing hardly, in ten minutes--gone!
 Yet still God's in His heaven, all is right
 In the best possible of worlds. The woe,
 Even His scaled eyes must see, is partial, only
 A seeming woe, we cannot understand.
 God loves us, God looks down on this out strife
 And smiles in pity, blows a pipe at times
 And calls some warriors home. We do not die,
 God would not let us, He is too "intense,"
 Too "passionate," a whole day sorrows He
 Because a grass-blade dies. How rare life is!
 On earth, the love and fellowship of men,
 Men sternly banded: banded for what end?
 Banded to maim and kill their fellow men--
 For even Huns are men. In heaven above
 A genial umpire, a good judge of sport,
 Won't let us hurt each other! Let's rejoice
 God keeps us faithful, pens us still in fold.
 Ah, what a faith is ours (almost, it seems,
 Large as a mustard-seed)--we trust and trust,
 Nothing can shake us! Ah, how good God is
 To suffer us to be born just now, when youth
 That else would rust, can slake his blade in gore,
 Where very God Himself does seem to walk
 The bloody fields of Flanders He so loves!
