from The Bridge: Cutty Sark
Hart Crane
1899-1932
Modern

History & Politics, Seas, Rivers, & Streams, Nature, Social Commentaries



I met a man in South Street, tall-- 
a nervous shark tooth swung on his chain.   
His eyes pressed through green glass   
--green glasses, or bar lights made them   
so-- 
      shine-- 
                GREEN-- 
                           eyes-- 
stepped out--forgot to look at you 
or left you several blocks away-- 

in the nickel-in-the-slot piano jogged 
"Stamboul Nights"--weaving somebody's nickel--sang-- 

      O Stamboul Rose--dreams weave the rose! 

            Murmurs of Leviathan he spoke,   
            and rum was Plato in our heads . . . 

"It's S.S. Ala--Antwerp--now remember kid   
to put me out at three she sails on time.   
I'm not much good at time any more keep 
weakeyed watches sometimes snooze--" his bony hands   
got to beating time . . . "A whaler once-- 
I ought to keep time and get over it--I'm a   
Democrat--I know what time it is--No   
I don't want to know what time it is--that   
damned white Arctic killed my time . . . " 

      O Stamboul Rose--drums weave-- 

"I ran a donkey engine down there on the Canal   
in Panama--got tired of that-- 
then Yucatan selling kitchenware--beads-- 
have you seen Popocatepetl--birdless mouth   
with ashes sifting down--? 
                                          and then the coast again . . . " 

      Rose of Stamboul O coral Queen-- 
      teased remnants of the skeletons of cities-- 
      and galleries, galleries of watergutted lava   
      snarling stone--green--drums--drown-- 

Sing! 
"--that spiracle!" he shot a finger out the door . . .   
"O life's a geyser--beautiful--my lungs-- 
No--I can't live on land--!" 

I saw the frontiers gleaming of his mind; 
or are there frontiers--running sands sometimes   
running sands--somewhere--sands running . . . 
Or they may start some white machine that sings.   
Then you may laugh and dance the axletree-- 
steel--silver--kick the traces--and know-- 

      ATLANTIS ROSE drums wreathe the rose,   
      the star floats burning in a gulf of tears   
      and sleep another thousand-- 

                                              interminably 
long since somebody's nickel--stopped-- 
playing-- 

A wind worried those wicker-neat lapels, the   
swinging summer entrances to cooler hells . . .   
Outside a wharf truck nearly ran him down   
--he lunged up Bowery way while the dawn 
was putting the Statue of Liberty out--that   
torch of hers you know-- 

I started walking home across the Bridge . . . 

                  .         .         .         .         .          

Blithe Yankee vanities, turreted sprites, winged 
                                           British repartees, skil-          
ful savage sea-girls            
that bloomed in the spring--Heave, weave 
those bright designs the trade winds drive . . . 

      Sweet opium and tea, Yo-ho! 
      Pennies for porpoises that bank the keel!   
      Fins whip the breeze around Japan! 

Bright skysails ticketing the Line, wink round the Horn   
to Frisco, Melbourne . . . 
                                       Pennants, parabolas-- 
clipper dreams indelible and ranging,   
baronial white on lucky blue! 

      Perennial-Cutty-trophied-Sark! 

Thermopylae, Black Prince, Flying Cloud through Sunda   
--scarfed of foam, their bellies veered green esplanades,   
locked in wind-humors, ran their eastings down; 

      at Java Head freshened the nip   
      (sweet opium and tea!) 
      and turned and left us on the lee . . . 

Buntlines tusseling (91 days, 20 hours and anchored!)   
                                                    Rainbow, Leander 
(last trip a tragedy)--where can you be 
Nimbus? and you rivals two-- 

            a long tack keeping-- 
                                           Taeping?   
                                          Ariel?
