Fra Lippo Lippi 
Robert Browning 
1812-1889
Victorian
England
Christianity, Philosophy, Arts & Sciences, Religion, Painting & Sculpture

Blank Verse, Dramatic Monologue, Persona

[Florentine painter, 1412-69]
I am poor brother Lippo, by your leave! 
You need not clap your torches to my face. 
Zooks,Zooks! word of emphasis, from "Gadzooks", as in "God's hooks" - referring to the nails that held Christ to the Cross what's to blame? you think you see a monk! 
What, 'tis past midnight, and you go the rounds, 
And here you catch me at an alley's end 
Where sportivesportive amorous in nature, wanton ladies leave their doors ajar? 
The Carmine'sCarmine's Convent of the Carmine, where Lippi was placed at the age of eight. my cloister: hunt it up, 
Do,--harry outharry out drive off, if you must show your zeal, 
Whatever rat, there, haps on his wrong hole, 
And nip each softlingsoftling "a soft little hand" [OED] of a wee white mouse, 
Weke, weke, that's crept to keep him company! 
Aha, you know your betters! Then, you'll take 
Your hand away that's fiddling on my throat, 
And please to know me likewise. Who am I? 
Why, one, sir, who is lodging with a friend 
Three streets off--he's a certain . . . how d'ye call? 
Master--a ...Cosimo of the MediciCosimo of the Medici 1389-1464, Florentine politician and patron of the arts, who supported Lippi , 
I' the house that caps the corner. Boh! you were best! 
Remember and tell me, the day you're hanged, 
How you affected such a gullet's-gripe! 
But you, sir, it concerns you that your knaves 
Pick up a manner nor discredit you: 
Zooks, are we pilchardspilchards small sea fish, that they sweep the streets 
And count fair price what comes into their net? 
He's Judas to a tittleto a tittle to a T, that man is! 
Just such a face! Why, sir, you make amends. 
Lord, I'm not angry! Bid your hang-dogshang-dogs despicable people go 
Drink out this quarter-florin to the health 
Of the munificent House that harbours me 
(And many more beside, lads! more beside!) 
And all's come square again. I'd like his face-- 
His, elbowing on his comrade in the door 
With the pike and lantern,--for the slave that holds 
John Baptist's head a-dangle by the hair 
With one hand ("Look you, now," as who should say) 
And his weapon in the other, yet unwiped!John Baptist's head a-dangle ... unwiped John the Baptist was a New Testament prophet who baptized Jesus; see Matthew 3. The "Beheading of the Baptist" and "Banquet of Herod" are two works by Lippi (both in Prato) on the theme of John the Baptist's end at Herod's hands. 
It's not your chance to have a bit of chalk, 
A wood-coal or the like? or you should see! 
Yes, I'm the painter, since you style me so. 
What, brother Lippo's doings, up and down, 
You know them and they take you? like enough! 
I saw the proper twinkle in your eye-- 
'Tell you, I liked your looks at very first. 
Let's sit and set things straight now, hip to haunch. 
Here's spring come, and the nights one makes up bands 
To roam the town and sing out carnivalcarnival riotous season prior to the austerity of Lent, 
And I've been three weeks shut within my mewmew figuratively speaking, a cage, 
A-painting for the great man, saints and saints 
And saints again. I could not paint all night-- 
Ouf! I leaned out of window for fresh air. 
There came a hurry of feet and little feet, 
A sweep of lute strings, laughs, and whiftswhifts bits of a song of song, -- 
Flower o' the broom, 
Take away love, and our earth is a tomb! 
Flower o' the quince, 
I let Lisa go, and what good in life since? 
Flower o' the thyme--and so on. Round they went. 
Scarce had they turned the corner when a titter 
Like the skipping of rabbits by moonlight,--three slim shapes, 
And a face that looked up . . . zooks, sir, flesh and blood, 
That's all I'm made of! Into shreds it went, 
Curtain and counterpane and coverlet, 
All the bed-furniture--a dozen knots, 
There was a ladder! Down I let myself, 
Hands and feet, scrambling somehow, and so dropped, 
And after them. I came up with the fun 
Hard by Saint LaurenceSaint Laurence a church in Florence: S. Lorenzo in Vasari. Lippi painted an Annunciation scene here, hail fellow, well met,-- 
Flower o' the rose, 
If I've been merry, what matter who knows? 
And so as I was stealing back again 
To get to bed and have a bit of sleep 
Ere I rise up to-morrow and go work 
On Jerome knocking at his poor old breast 
With his great round stone to subdue the flesh,Jerome ...flesh St. Jerome (c.340-420), a Doctor of the Latin Church, noted for an ascetic life and writings 
You snap me of the sudden. Ah, I see! 
Though your eye twinkles still, you shake your head-- 
Mine's shaved--a monk, you say--the sting 's in that! 
If Master Cosimo announced himself, 
Mum's the word naturally; but a monk! 
Come, what am I a beast for? tell us, now! 
I was a baby when my mother died 
And father died and left me in the street. 
I starved there, God knows how, a year or two 
On fig-skins, melon-parings, rinds and shucks, 
Refuse and rubbish. One fine frosty day, 
My stomach being empty as your hat, 
The wind doubled me up and down I went. 
Old Aunt LapacciaAunt Lapaccia Filippo's aunt, who cared for him after his father died trussed me with one hand, 
(Its fellow was a stinger as I knew) 
And so along the wall, over the bridge, 
By the straight cut to the convent. Six words there, 
While I stood munching my first bread that month: 
"So, boy, you're minded," quoth the good fat father 
Wiping his own mouth, 'twas refection-time,-- 
"To quit this very miserable world? 
Will you renounce" . . . "the mouthful of bread?" thought I; 
By no means! Brief, they made a monk of me; 
I did renounce the world, its pride and greed, 
Palace, farm, villa, shop, and banking-house, 
Trash, such as these poor devils of Medici 
Have given their hearts to--all at eight years old. 
Well, sir, I found in time, you may be sure, 
'Twas not for nothing--the good bellyful, 
The warm serge and the rope that goes all round, 
And day-long blessed idleness beside! 
"Let's see what the urchin's fit for"--that came next. 
Not overmuch their way, I must confess. 
Such a to-do! They tried me with their books: 
Lord, they'd have taught me Latin in pure waste! 
Flower o' the clove. 
All the Latin I construe is, "amo" I love! 
But, mind you, when a boy starves in the streets 
Eight years together, as my fortune was, 
Watching folk's faces to know who will fling 
The bit of half-stripped grape-bunch he desires, 
And who will curse or kick him for his pains,-- 
Which gentleman processional and fine, 
Holding a candle to the Sacrament, 
Will wink and let him lift a plate and catch 
The droppings of the wax to sell again, 
Or holla for the Eightthe Eight "the magistrates of Florence" [Ian Jack]  and have him whipped,-- 
How say I?--nay, which dog bites, which lets drop 
His bone from the heap of offal in the street,-- 
Why, soul and sense of him grow sharp alike, 
He learns the look of things, and none the less 
For admonition from the hunger-pinch. 
I had a store of such remarks, be sure, 
Which, after I found leisure, turned to use. 
I drew men's faces on my copy-books, 
Scrawled them within the antiphonary's margeantiphonary's marge margin of an antiphon (a book of chants used during Mass), 
Joined legs and arms to the long music-notes, 
Found eyes and nose and chin for A's and B's, 
And made a string of pictures of the world 
Betwixt the ins and outs of verb and noun, 
On the wall, the bench, the door. The monks looked black. 
"Nay," quoth the Prior, "turn him out, d'ye say? 
In no wise. Lose a crow and catch a lark. 
What if at last we get our man of parts, 
We CarmelitesCarmelites an order of mendicant friars, founded at Mount Carmel in the 12th Century; also called White Friars, like those CamaldoleseCamaldolese member of the religious order founded in the 11th Century also called Camaldolites 
And Preaching FriarsPreaching Friars Dominicans, an order of mendicant friars, founded by St. Dominic in the 13th Century, to do our church up fine 
And put the front on it that ought to be!" 
And hereupon he bade me daub away. 
Thank you! my head being crammed, the walls a blank, 
Never was such prompt disemburdeningdisemburdening disburdening. 
First, every sort of monk, the black and whitethe black and the white Black Friars are Dominicans; White Friars are Carmelites, 
I drew them, fat and lean: then, folk at church, 
From good old gossips waiting to confess 
Their cribscribs minor thefts of barrel-droppings, candle-ends,-- 
To the breathless fellow at the altar-foot, 
Fresh from his murder, safe and sitting there 
With the little children round him in a row 
Of admiration, half for his beard and half 
For that white anger of his victim's son 
Shaking a fist at him with one fierce arm, 
Signing himself with the other because of Christ 
(Whose sad face on the cross sees only this 
After the passion of a thousand years) 
Till some poor girl, her apron o'er her head, 
(Which the intense eyes looked through) came at eve 
On tiptoe, said a word, dropped in a loaf, 
Her pair of earrings and a bunch of flowers 
(The brute took growling), prayed, and so was gone. 
I painted all, then cried "'Tis ask and have; 
Choose, for more's ready!"--laid the ladder flat, 
And showed my covered bit of cloister-wall. 
The monks closed in a circle and praised loud 
Till checked, taught what to see and not to see, 
Being simple bodies,--"That's the very man! 
Look at the boy who stoops to pat the dog! 
That woman's like the Prior's niecePrior's niece euphemism for an intimate of the Prior who comes 
To care about his asthma: it's the life!'' 
But there my triumph's straw-fire flared and funkedfunked went out, smoked; 
Their betters took their turn to see and say: 
The Prior and the learned pulled a face 
And stopped all that in no time. "How? what's here? 
Quite from the mark of painting, bless us all! 
Faces, arms, legs, and bodies like the true 
As much as pea and pea! it's devil's-game! 
Your business is not to catch men with show, 
With homage to the perishable clay, 
But lift them over it, ignore it all, 
Make them forget there's such a thing as flesh. 
Your business is to paint the souls of men-- 
Man's soul, and it's a fire, smoke . . . no, it's not . . . 
It's vapour done up like a new-born babe-- 
(In that shape when you die it leaves your mouth) 
It's . . . well, what matters talking, it's the soul! 
Give us no more of body than shows soul! 
Here's GiottoGiotto Florentine painter, Giotto di Bondone (1266/67-1337) [Metropolitan Museum site] (For an example of his work, see here.), with his Saint a-praising God, 
That sets us praising--why not stop with him? 
Why put all thoughts of praise out of our head 
With wonder at lines, colours, and what not? 
Paint the soul, never mind the legs and arms! 
Rub all out, try at it a second time. 
Oh, that white smallish female with the breasts, 
She's just my niece . . . HerodiasHerodias Herod's second wife, see Matthew 14:1-12. Her daughter Salome dances before Herod, who afterwards grants her whatever she will wish.   At the suggestion of Herodias, Salome asks for John the Baptist's head.   Lippi's "Banquet of Herod" (in Prato) shows this scene of the Baptist's head on a platter., I would say,-- 
Who went and danced and got men's heads cut off! 
Have it all out!" Now, is this sense, I ask? 
A fine way to paint soul, by painting body 
So ill, the eye can't stop there, must go further 
And can't fare worse! Thus, yellow does for white 
When what you put for yellow's simply black, 
And any sort of meaning looks intense 
When all beside itself means and looks nought. 
Why can't a painter lift each foot in turn, 
Left foot and right foot, go a double step, 
Make his flesh liker and his soul more like, 
Both in their order? Take the prettiest face, 
The Prior's niece . . . patron-saint--is it so pretty 
You can't discover if it means hope, fear, 
Sorrow or joy? won't beauty go with these? 
Suppose I've made her eyes all right and blue, 
Can't I take breath and try to add life's flash, 
And then add soul and heighten them three-fold? 
Or say there's beauty with no soul at all-- 
(I never saw it--put the case the same--) 
If you get simple beauty and nought else, 
You get about the best thing God invents: 
That's somewhat: and you'll find the soul you have missed, 
Within yourself, when you return him thanks. 
"Rub all out!" Well, well, there's my life, in short, 
And so the thing has gone on ever since. 
I'm grown a man no doubt, I've broken bounds: 
You should not take a fellow eight years old 
And make him swear to never kiss the girls. 
I'm my own master, paint now as I please-- 
Having a friend, you see, in the Corner-house! 
Lord, it's fast holding by the rings in front-- 
Those great rings serve more purposes than just 
To plant a flag in, or tie up a horse! 
And yet the old schooling sticks, the old grave eyes 
Are peeping o'er my shoulder as I work, 
The heads shake still--"It's art's decline, my son! 
You're not of the true painters, great and old; 
Brother Angelico'sBrother Angelico Fra Angelico (1387-1455), Florentine painter, who was also a Dominican. For examples of the work of Fra Angelico, search the Metropolitan Museum website. the man, you'll find; 
Brother LorenzoBrother Lorenzo Lorenzo Monaco (Piero di Giovanni), active 1390-1423, Florentine painter who was a Camaldoli monk. For examples of the work of Fra Lorenzo, search the Metropolitan Museum website. stands his single peer: 
Fag onfag on labor at at flesh, you'll never make the third!" 
Flower o' the pine, 
You keep your mistr ... manners, and I'll stick to mine! 
I'm not the third, then: bless us, they must know! 
Don't you think they're the likeliest to know, 
They with their Latin? So, I swallow my rage, 
Clench my teeth, suck my lips in tight, and paint 
To please them--sometimes do and sometimes don't; 
For, doing most, there's pretty sure to come 
A turn, some warm eve finds me at my saints-- 
A laugh, a cry, the business of the world-- 
(Flower o' the peach 
Death for us all, and his own life for each!) 
And my whole soul revolves, the cup runs overcup runs over Compare to Psalms 23:5 : "my cup runneth over.", 
The world and life's too big to pass for a dream, 
And I do these wild things in sheer despite, 
And play the fooleries you catch me at, 
In pure rage! The old mill-horse, out at grass 
After hard years, throws up his stiff heels so, 
Although the miller does not preach to him 
The only good of grass is to make chaff. 
What would men have? Do they like grass or no-- 
May they or mayn't they? all I want's the thing 
Settled for ever one way. As it is, 
You tell too many lies and hurt yourself: 
You don't like what you only like too much, 
You do like what, if given you at your word, 
You find abundantly detestable. 
For me, I think I speak as I was taught; 
I always see the garden and God there 
A-making man's wifeI always see the garden and God there ... wife See Genesis 2:18-23.: and, my lesson learned, 
The value and significance of flesh, 
I can't unlearn ten minutes afterwards. 

You understand me: I'm a beast, I know. 
But see, now--why, I see as certainly 
As that the morning-star's about to shine, 
What will hap some day. We've a youngster here 
Comes to our convent, studies what I do, 
Slouches and stares and lets no atom drop: 
His name is Guidi--he'll not mind the monks-- 
They call him Hulking TomGuidi; Hulking Tom Tommaso Guidi, painter better known as Masaccio (1401-28), that is "Careless Tom, or Hulking Tom (not necessarily in disapproval)" (Vasari, 1.318)., he lets them talk-- 
He picks my practice up--he'll paint apace. 
I hope so--though I never live so long, 
I know what's sure to follow. You be judge! 
You speak no Latin more than I, belike; 
However, you're my man, you've seen the world 
--The beauty and the wonder and the power, 
The shapes of things, their colours, lights and shades, 
Changes, surprises,--and God made it all! 
--For what? Do you feel thankful, ay or no, 
For this fair town's face, yonder river's line, 
The mountain round it and the sky above, 
Much more the figures of man, woman, child, 
These are the frame to? What's it all about? 
To be passed over, despised? or dwelt upon, 
Wondered at? oh, this last of course!--you say. 
But why not do as well as say,--paint these 
Just as they are, careless what comes of it? 
God's works--paint any one, and count it crime 
To let a truth slip. Don't object, "His works 
Are here already; nature is complete: 
Suppose you reproduce her--(which you can't) 
There's no advantage! you must beat her, then." 
For, don't you mark? we're made so that we love 
First when we see them painted, things we have passed 
Perhaps a hundred times nor cared to see; 
And so they are better, painted--better to us, 
Which is the same thing. Art was given for that; 
God uses us to help each other so, 
Lending our minds out. Have you noticed, now, 
Your cullion'scullion term of contempt: a rascal hanging face? A bit of chalk, 
And trust me but you should, though! How much more, 
If I drew higher things with the same truth! 
That were to take the Prior's pulpit-place, 
Interpret God to all of you! Oh, oh, 
It makes me mad to see what men shall do 
And we in our graves! This world's no blot for us, 
Nor blank; it means intensely, and means good: 
To find its meaning is my meat and drink. 
"Ay, but you don't so instigate to prayer!" 
Strikes in the Prior: "when your meaning's plain 
It does not say to folk--remember matinsmatins a set time for morning prayers, 
Or, mind you fast next Friday!" Why, for this 
What need of art at all? A skull and bones, 
Two bits of stick nailed crosswise, or, what's best, 
A bell to chime the hour with, does as well. 
I painted a Saint Laurence six months since 
At PratoPrato the cathedral in Florence; Lippo made frescoes there from 1452-66, splashed the fresco in fine style: 
"How looks my painting, now the scaffold's down?" 
I ask a brother: "Hugely," he returns-- 
"Already not one phizphiz face, physiognomy of your three slaves 
Who turn the Deacon off his toasted sideDeacon . . . toasted side St. Laurence (d. 258), who was a deacon and martyr; he was roasted to death, 
But's scratched and prodded to our heart's content, 
The pious people have so eased their own 
With coming to say prayers there in a rage: 
We get on fast to see the bricks beneath. 
Expect another job this time next year, 
For pity and religion grow i' the crowd-- 
Your painting serves its purpose!" Hang the fools! 

--That is--you'll not mistake an idle word 
Spoke in a huff by a poor monk, God wotGod wot God knows, 
Tasting the air this spicy night which turns 
The unaccustomed head like Chianti wine! 
Oh, the church knows! don't misreport me, now! 
It's natural a poor monk out of bounds 
Should have his apt word to excuse himself: 
And hearken how I plot to make amends. 
I have bethought me: I shall paint a piece 
... There's for you! Give me six months, then go, see 
Something in Sant' Ambrogio'sSant' Ambrogio's Vasari: "There [Florence] he wrought a very beautiful panel for the high-altar of the Nuns of S. Ambrogio, which made him very dear to Cosimo de' Medici, who became very much his friend for this reason." [Giorgio Vasari Lives of the Painters, Sculptors and Architects, trans. Gaston du C. de Vere, New York: Alfred A. Knopf (Everyman's Library), 1:437]! Bless the nuns! 
They want a cast o' my office. I shall paint 
God in the midst, Madonna and her babe, 
Ringed by a bowery, flowery angel-brood, 
Lilies and vestments and white faces, sweet 
As puff on puff of grated orris-rootorris-root an iris, used in powdered form in perfumes and medicine 
When ladies crowd to Church at midsummer. 
And then i' the front, of course a saint or two-- 
Saint John' because he saves the FlorentinesSaint John ... Florentines John the Baptist, who baptized Jesus; see Matthew 3. Also see earlier note., 
Saint Ambrose, who puts down in black and white 
The convent's friends and gives them a long daySaint Ambrose ... day Either Saint Ambrose (c. 339-97) a Doctor of the Latin Church, who was the bishop of Milan, or Saint Ambrose of Camaldoli, also known as Fra Ambrogio (c. 1386-1439), who was in the Camaldolensian Order in Florence., 
And Job, I must have him there past mistake, 
The man of UzJob; man of Uz Job   main character of The Book of Job in the Hebrew Bible, focusing on Job's suffering, and by extension, human suffering. Job 1.1 begins "There was once a man in the land of Uz whose name was Job." (and Us without the z, 
Painters who need his patience). Well, all these 
Secured at their devotion, up shall come 
Out of a corner when you least expect, 
As one by a dark stair into a great light, 
Music and talking, who but Lippo! I!-- 
MazedMazed stupefied, motionless, and moonstruck--I'm the man! 
Back I shrink--what is this I see and hear? 
I, caught up with my monk's-things by mistake, 
My old serge gown and rope that goes all round, 
I, in this presence, this pure company! 
Where's a hole, where's a corner for escape? 
Then steps a sweet angelic slip of a thing 
Forward, puts out a soft palm--"Not so fast!" 
--Addresses the celestial presence, "nay-- 
He made you and devised you, after all, 
Though he's none of you! Could Saint John there draw-- 
His camel-hair make up a painting brush? 
We come to brother Lippo for all that, 
Iste perfecit opus!Iste perfecit opus From the Latin, " 'This man made the work.' In this painting, as later completed, these words appear beside a figure which Browning took to be Lippi's self-portrait." [Norton The Norton Anthology of English Literature: Major Authors Edition. Ed. M. H. Abrams et al., 1962] So, all smile-- 
I shuffle sideways with my blushing face 
Under the cover of a hundred wings 
Thrown like a spread of kirtleskirtles a man's tunic or a woman's gown when you're gay 
And play hot cocklesplay hot cockles a euphemism, based on the name of a children's game, for having sex, all the doors being shut, 
Till, wholly unexpected, in there pops 
The hothead husband! Thus I scuttle off 
To some safe bench behind, not letting go 
The palm of her, the little lily thing 
That spoke the good word for me in the nick, 
Like the Prior's niece . . . Saint LucySaint Lucy a virgin and martyr who died in Syracuse, Sicily, in the early 4th Century; she is a patron saint for those with eye diseases, I would say. 
And so all's saved for me, and for the church 
A pretty picture gained. Go, six months hence! 
Your hand, sir, and good-bye: no lights, no lights! 
The street's hushed, and I know my own way back, 
Don't fear me! There's the grey beginning. Zooks! 

