from The Task, Book VI: The Winter Walk at Noon 
William Cowper 
1731-1800
Augustan
England
God & the Divine, Animals, Death, Eating & Drinking, Money & Economics, Sorrow & Grieving, Arts & Sciences, Winter, Nature, War & Conflict, Faith & Doubt, Activities, Poetry & Poets, Social Commentaries, Living, History & Politics, Disappointment & Failure, Health & Illness, Religion

Imagery, Blank Verse, Epic

(excerpt)
Thus heav'n-ward all things tend. For all were once 
Perfect, and all must be at length restor'd. 
So God has greatly purpos'd; who would else 
In his dishonour'd works himself endure 
Dishonour, and be wrong'd without redress. 
Haste then, and wheel away a shatter'd world, 
Ye slow-revolving seasons! we would see, 
(A sight to which our eyes are strangers yet) 
A world that does not dread and hate his laws, 
And suffer for its crime; would learn how fair 
The creature is that God pronounces good, 
How pleasant in itself what pleases him. 
Here ev'ry drop of honey hides a sting, 
Worms wind themselves into our sweetest flow'rs, 
And ev'n the joy that haply some poor heart 
Derives from heav'n, pure as the fountain 
Is sully'd in the stream; taking a taint 
From touch of human lips, at best impure. 
Oh for a world in principle as chaste 
As this is gross and selfish! over which 
Custom and prejudice shall bear no sway, 
That govern all things here, should'ring aside 
The meek and modest truth, and forcing her 
To seek a refuge from the tongue of strife 
In nooks obscure, far from the ways of men: 
Where violence shall never lift the sword, 
Nor cunning justify the proud man's wrong, 
Leaving the poor no remedy but tears: 
Where he that fills an office, shall esteem 
Th' occasion it presents of doing good 
More than the perquisite: Where law shall speak 
Seldom, and never but as wisdom prompts 
And equity; not jealous more to guard 
A worthless form, than to decide aright: 
Where fashion shall not sanctify abuse, 
Nor smooth good-breeding (supplemental grace) 
With lean performance ape the work of love. 

. . .

   He is the happy man, whose life ev'n now 
Shows somewhat of that happier life to come; 
Who, doom'd to an obscure but tranquil state, 
Is pleas'd with it, and, were he free to chuse, 
Would make his fate his choice; whom peace, the fruit 
Of virtue, and whom virtue, fruit of faith, 
Prepare for happiness; bespeak him one 
Content indeed to sojourn while he must 
Below the skies, but having there his home. 
The world o'erlooks him in her busy search 
Of objects more illustrious in her view; 
And, occupy'd as earnestly as she, 
Though more sublimely, he o'erlooks the world. 
She scorns his pleasures, for she knows them not; 
He seeks not hers, for he has prov'd them vain. 
He cannot skim the ground like summer birds 
Pursuing gilded flies, and such he deems 
Her honors, her emoluments, her joys. 
Therefore in contemplation is his bliss, 
Whose pow'r is such, that whom she lifts from earth 
She makes familiar with a heav'n unseen, 
And shows him glories yet to be reveal'd. 

. . .

So life glides smoothly and by stealth away, 
More golden than that age of fabled gold 
Renown'd in ancient song; not vex'd with care 
Or stain'd with guilt, beneficent, approv'd 
Of God and man, and peaceful in its end. 
So glide my life away! and so at last, 
My share of duties decently fulfill'd, 
May some disease, not tardy to perform 
Its destin'd office, yet with gentle stroke, 
Dismiss me weary to a safe retreat, 
Beneath a turf that I have often trod. 
It shall not grieve me, then, that once, when call'd 
To dress a Sofa with the flow'rs of verse, 
I play'd awhile, obedient to the fair, 
With that light task; but soon, to please her more 
Whom flow'rs alone I knew would little please, 
Let fall th' unfinish'd wreath, and rov'd for fruit; 
Rov'd far, and gather'd much: some harsh, 'tis true, 
Pick'd from the thorns and briars of reproof, 
But wholesome, well-digested; grateful some 
To palates that can taste immortal truth, 
Insipid else, and sure to be despis'd. 
But all is in his hand whose praise I seek. 
In vain the poet sings, and the world hears, 
If he regard not, though divine the theme. 
'Tis not in artful measures, in the chime 
And idle tinkling of a minstrel's lyre, 
To charm his ear, whose eye is on the heart; 
Whose frown can disappoint the proudest strain, 
Whose approbation--prosper even mine. 

