Sad Wine (I) 
Cesare Pavese 
1908-1950

Italy
Living, Growing Old, Relationships, Friends & Enemies, Activities, Eating & Drinking

Free Verse

It's a fine fact that whenever I sit in a tavern corner 
sipping a grappa, the pederast's there, or the kids 
with their screaming, or the unemployed guy, 
or some beautiful girl outside--all breaking 
the thread of my smoke. That's how it is, kid, 
I'm telling it straight, I work at Lucento. 
But that voice, that sorrowful voice of the old man 
(forty-ish, maybe?) who shook my hand 
one night in the cold and then walked with me back 
to my house, that tone like an old cornet-- 
I'll never forget it, not even in death. 
He said nothing of wine, but spoke to me then 
because I had suffered and was smoking a pipe. 
"And pipe smokers," he declared, shaking a little, 
"can always be trusted!" I nodded my head. 

I came back to find the girls friendlier, healthier, 
their skirts cut higher--this after months of hunger-- 
and I went and got married because I was drunk 
on all their freshness--a senile love. 
I married the sassiest, most muscular girl 
so I'd taste life again, so I wouldn't die 
behind a desk, in an office, surrounded by strangers. 
But Nella too was a stranger to me, and a student pilot 
saw her with me once, and later laid hands on her. 
He's dead now, that coward--that poor kid-- 
spun out of the sky--I guess I'm the coward. 
Now she's got her baby--who knows if he's mine-- 
and she's home all the time and I'm just a stranger 
who can't keep her happy. I don't dare say a word 
and neither does Nella, she just looks at me. 

It was beautiful how he cried as he told it, 
the way a drunk cries, his whole body to it, 
and he hung on my shoulder saying, Between us, 
always respect, and there I was, shaking with cold, 
wanting to leave, and helping him walk. 

Sipping grappa is nice, but there's also a pleasure 
in listening to the venting of an impotent old man 
who's back from the front and asks your forgiveness. 
What satisfaction will I ever have in this life? 
I'm telling it straight, I work at Lucento. 
What satisfaction will I ever have in this life?
