Smokers of Paper 
Cesare Pavese 
1908-1950

Italy
Activities, Jobs & Working, Arts & Sciences, Music, Social Commentaries, History & Politics

Free Verse

He's brought me to hear his band. He sits in a corner 
mouthing his clarinet. A hellish racket begins. 
Outside, through flashes of lightning, wind gusts 
and rain whips, knocking the lights out 
every five minutes. In the dark, their faces 
give it their all, contorted, as they play a dance tune 
from memory. Full of energy, my poor friend 
anchors them all from behind. His clarinet writhes, 
breaks through the din, passes beyond it, releasing 
like a lone soul, into a dry, rough silence. 

The poor pieces of brass have been dented too often: 
the hands working the stops also work in the fields, 
and the obstinate brows stay fixed on the ground. 
Miserable worn-out blood, weakened 
by too many labors--you can hear it groan 
in their notes, as my friend struggles to lead them, 
his own hands hardened from swinging a hammer, 
from pushing a plane, from scraping a living. 

He's lost all his old comrades, and he's only thirty. 
Part of the postwar group that grew up on hunger. 
They all came to Turin, to look for a life, 
and discovered injustice. He learned, without smiling, 
how to work in a factory. He learned how to measure 
the hunger of others with his own fatigue-- 
injustice was everywhere. He tried to find peace 
by walking, at night, down streets without ends, 
half-asleep, but found only thousands of streetlamps 
blazing down on iniquity: hoarse women and drunks, 
staggering puppets, far from their homes, He came, 
one winter, to Turin--factory lights, smoke and ash-- 
and he learned what work is. He accepted that work 
was part of a man's hard fate; if all men did that, 
there just might be some justice in this world. 
And he found new comrades. He suffered their long words, 
he listened and waited for them to be over. 
He made them his comrades. Families of them 
in each house, the city surrounded by them, the face 
of the world covered with them. And each of them 
felt desperate enough to conquer the world. 

They sound harsh tonight, despite all the time 
he spent coaching each player. He ignores the loud rain 
and the flickering lights. His face is severe, 
fixed on some grief, almost biting the mouthpiece. 
I've seen this expression before, one evening, just us 
and his brother, who's ten years sadder than him. 
We were up late in the dim light, the brother studying 
a lathe he had built that didn't work right, 
and my poor friend cursing the fate that kept him there, 
bound to his hammer and plane, feeding a pair 
of old people he never asked for. 
                                                That's when he yelled 
that it wasn't fate that made the world suffer 
or made the daylight spark blasphemous outbursts: 
man is the guilty one. If we only could just leave, 
and be hungry and free, and say no 
to a life that uses our love and our piety, 
our families, our patches of dirt, to shackle our hands.
