Meditations 
Margaret Fuller 
1810-1850


Faith & Doubt, Religion, God & the Divine, Living, The Mind



Sunday, 12 May 1833
The clouds are marshalling across the sky, 
Leaving their deepest tints upon yon range 
Of soul-alluring hills. The breeze comes softly, 
Laden with tribute that a hundred orchards 
Now in their fullest blossom send, in thanks 
For this refreshing shower. The birds pour forth 
In heightened melody the notes of praise 
They had suspended while God's voice was speaking, 
And his eye flashing down upon his world. 
I sigh, half-charmed, half-pained. My sense is living, 
And, taking in this freshened beauty, tells 
Its pleasure to the mind. The mind replies, 
And strives to wake the heart in turn, repeating 
Poetic sentiments from many a record 
Which other souls have left, when stirred and satisfied 
By scenes as fair, as fragrant. But the heart 
Sends back a hollow echo to the call 
Of outward things, -- and its once bright companion, 
Who erst would have been answered by a stream 
Of life-fraught treasures, thankful to be summoned, -- 
Can now rouse nothing better than this echo; 
Unmeaning voice, which mocks their softened accents. 
Content thee, beautiful world! and hush, still busy mind! 
My heart hath sealed its fountains. To the things 
Of Time they shall be oped no more. Too long, 
Too often were they poured forth: part have sunk 
Into the desert; part profaned and swollen 
By bitter waters, mixed by those who feigned 
They asked them for refreshment, which, turned back, 
Have broken and o'erflowed their former urns. 
So when ye talk of pleasure, lonely world, 
And busy mind, ye ne'er again shall move me 
To answer ye, though still your calls have power 
To jar me through, and cause dull aching here. 

No so the voice which hailed me from the depths 
Of yon dark-bosomed cloud, now vanishing 
Before the sun ye greet. It touched my centre, 
The voice of the Eternal, calling me 
To feel his other worlds; to feel that if 
I could deserve a home, I still might find it 
In other spheres, -- and bade me not despair, 
Though 'want of harmony' and 'aching void' 
Are terms invented by the men of this, 
Which I may not forget. 
                                 In former times 
I loved to see the lightnings flash athwart 
The stooping heavens; I loved to hear the thunder 
Call to the seas and mountains; for I thought 
'Tis thus man's flashing fancy doth enkidle 
The firmament of mind; 'tis thus his eloquence   
Calls unto the soul's depths and heights; and still 
I defied the creature, nor remembered 
The Creator in his works. 
                                    Ah now how different! 
The proud delight of that keen sympathy 
Is gone; no longer riding on the wave, 
But whelmed beneath it: my own plans and works, 
Or, as the Scriptures phrase it, my 'inventions' 
No longer interpose 'twist me and Heaven. 

Today, for the first time, I felt the Deity, 
And uttered prayer on hearing thunder. This 
Must be thy will, -- for finer, higher spirits 
Have gone through this same process, -- yet I think 
There was religion in that strong delight, 
Those sounds, those thoughts of power imparted. True, 
I did not say, 'He is the Lord thy God,' 
But I had feeling of his essence. But 
''Twas pride by which the angels fell.' So be it! 
But O, might I but see a little onward! 
Father, I cannot be a spirit of power; 
May I be active as a spirit of love, 
Since thou hast ta'en me from that path which Nature 
Seemed to appoint, O, deign to ope another, 
Where I may walk with thought and hope assured; 
'Lord, I believe; help thou mine unbelief!' 
Had I but faith like that which fired Novalis, 
I too could bear that the heart 'fall in ashes,' 
While the freed spirit rises from beneath them, 
With heavenward-look, and Phoenix-plumes upsoaring!

