In Reference to her Children, 23 June 1659 
Anne Bradstreet 
1612-1672
17th Century
U.S., New, England
Relationships, Gender & Sexuality, Time & Brevity, Nature, Social Commentaries, Living, Family & Ancestors, Weather, Animals, Parenthood

Couplet

I had eight birds hatcht in one nest, 
Four Cocks were there, and Hens the rest. 
I nurst them up with pain and care, 
No cost nor labour did I spare 
Till at the last they felt their wing, 
Mounted the Trees and learned to sing. 
Chief of the Brood then took his flight 
To Regions far and left me quite. 
My mournful chirps I after send 
Till he return, or I do end. 
Leave not thy nest, thy Dame and Sire, 
Fly back and sing amidst this Quire. 
My second bird did take her flight 
And with her mate flew out of sight. 
Southward they both their course did bend, 
And Seasons twain they there did spend, 
Till after blown by Southern gales 
They Norward steer'd with filled sails. 
A prettier bird was no where seen, 
Along the Beach, among the treen. 
I have a third of colour white 
On whom I plac'd no small delight, 
Coupled with mate loving and true, 
Hath also bid her Dame adieu. 
And where Aurora first appears, 
She now hath percht to spend her years. 
One to the Academy flew 
To chat among that learned crew. 
Ambition moves still in his breast 
That he might chant above the rest, 
Striving for more than to do well, 
That nightingales he might excell. 
My fifth, whose down is yet scarce gone, 
Is 'mongst the shrubs and bushes flown 
And as his wings increase in strength 
On higher boughs he'll perch at length. 
My other three still with me nest 
Until they're grown, then as the rest, 
Or here or there, they'll take their flight, 
As is ordain'd, so shall they light. 
If birds could weep, then would my tears 
Let others know what are my fears 
Lest this my brood some harm should catch 
And be surpris'd for want of watch 
Whilst pecking corn and void of care 
They fall un'wares in Fowler's snare; 
Or whilst on trees they sit and sing 
Some untoward boy at them do fling, 
Or whilst allur'd with bell and glass 
The net be spread and caught, alas; 
Or lest by Lime-twigs they be foil'd; 
Or by some greedy hawks be spoil'd. 
O would, my young, ye saw my breast 
And knew what thoughts there sadly rest. 
Great was my pain when I you bred, 
Great was my care when I you fed. 
Long did I keep you soft and warm 
And with my wings kept off all harm. 
My cares are more, and fears, than ever, 
My throbs such now as 'fore were never. 
Alas, my birds, you wisdom want 
Of perils you are ignorant. 
Oft times in grass, on trees, in flight, 
Sore accidents on you may light. 
O to your safety have an eye, 
So happy may you live and die. 
Mean while, my days in tunes I'll spend 
Till my weak lays with me shall end. 
In shady woods I'll sit and sing 
And things that past, to mind I'll bring. 
Once young and pleasant, as are you, 
But former toys (no joys) adieu! 
My age I will not once lament 
But sing, my time so near is spent, 
And from the top bough take my flight 
Into a country beyond sight 
Where old ones instantly grow young 
And there with seraphims set song. 
No seasons cold, nor storms they see 
But spring lasts to eternity. 
When each of you shall in your nest 
Among your young ones take your rest, 
In chirping languages oft them tell 
You had a Dame that lov'd you well, 
That did what could be done for young 
And nurst you up till you were strong 
And 'fore she once would let you fly 
She shew'd you joy and misery, 
Taught what was good, and what was ill, 
What would save life, and what would kill. 
Thus gone, amongst you I may live, 
And dead, yet speak and counsel give. 
Farewell, my birds, farewell, adieu, 
I happy am, if well with you. 

