from The Task, Book I: The Sofa 
William Cowper 
1731-1800
Augustan
England
Living, Landscapes & Pastorals, Seas, Rivers, & Streams, Nature, Arts & Sciences, Disappointment & Failure, History & Politics, Cities & Urban Life, Social Commentaries, Painting & Sculpture, Trees & Flowers, Sorrow & Grieving

Imagery, Allusion, Pastoral, Blank Verse, Dramatic Monologue, Persona, Epic

(excerpt)
Thou know'st my praise of nature most sincere, 
And that my raptures are not conjur'd up 
To serve occasions of poetic pomp, 
But genuine, and art partner of them all. 
How oft upon yon eminence our pace 
Has slacken'd to a pause, and we have borne 
The ruffling wind, scarce conscious that it blew, 
While admiration, feeding at the eye, 
And still unsated, dwelt upon the scene. 
Thence with what pleasure have we just discern'd 
The distant plough slow-moving, and beside 
His lab'ring team, that swerv'd not from the track, 
The sturdy swain diminish'd to a boy! 
Here Ouse, slow winding through a level plain 
Of spacious meads with cattle sprinkled o'er, 
Conducts the eye along its sinuous course 
Delighted.  There, fast rooted in his bank, 
Stand, never overlook'd, our fav'rite elms, 
That screen the herdsman's solitary hut; 
While far beyond, and overthwart the stream 
That as with molten glass inlays the vale, 
The sloping land recedes into the clouds; 
Displaying on its varied side the grace 
Of hedge-row beauties numberless, square tow'r, 
Tall spire, from which the sound of cheerful bells 
Just undulates upon the list'ning ear, 
Groves, heaths, and smoking villages remote. 
Scenes must be beautiful which daily view'd 
Please daily, and whose novelty survives 
Long knowledge and the scrutiny of years. 
Praise justly due to those that I describe. 

. . .

   But though true worth and virtue, in the mild 
And genial soil of cultivated life 
Thrive most, and may perhaps thrive only there, 
Yet not in cities oft.  In proud and gay 
And gain-devoted cities; thither flow, 
As to a common and most noisome sewer, 
The dregs and faeculence of ev'ry land. 
In cities foul example on most minds 
Begets its likeness.  Rank abundance breeds 
In gross and pamper'd cities sloth and lust, 
And wantonness and gluttonous excess. 
In cities, vice is hidden with most ease, 
Or seen with least reproach; and virtue, taught 
By frequent lapse, can hope no triumph there 
Beyond th' atchievement of successful flight. 
I do confess them nurs'ries of the arts, 
In which they flourish most: where, in the beams 
Of warm encouragement, and in the eye 
Of public note, they reach their perfect size. 
Such London is, by taste and wealth proclaim'd 
The fairest capital of all the world, 
By riot and incontinence the worst. 
There, touch'd by Reynolds, a dull blank becomes 
A lucid mirror, in which Nature sees 
All her reflected features.  Bacon there 
Gives more than female beauty to a stone, 
And Chatham's eloquence to marble lips. 

. . .

   God made the country, and man made the town: 
What wonder then, that health and virtue, gifts 
That can alone make sweet the bitter draught 
That life holds out to all, should most abound 
And least be threaten'd in the fields and groves? 
Possess ye therefore, ye who, borne about 
In chariots and sedans, know no fatigue 
But that of idleness, and taste no scenes 
But such as art contrives, possess ye still 
Your element; there only ye can shine, 
There only minds like yours can do no harm. 
Our groves were planted to console at noon 
The pensive wand'rer in their shades.  At eve 
The moon-beam, sliding softly in between 
The sleeping leaves, is all the light they wish, 
Birds warbling all the music.  We can spare 
The splendour of your lamps, they but eclipse 
Our softer satellite. Your songs confound 
Our more harmonious notes: the thrush departs 
Scar'd, and th' offended nightingale is mute. 
There is a public mischief in your mirth, 
It plagues your country.  Folly such as your's, 
Grac'd with a sword, and worthier of a fan, 
Has made, which enemies could ne'er have done, 
Our arch of empire, steadfast but for you, 
A mutilated structure, soon to fall.

