Tom Deadlight (1810) 
Herman Melville 
1819-1891


Nature, Seas, Rivers, & Streams, Activities, Travels & Journeys

Rhymed Stanza

     During a tempest encountered homeward-bound from the Mediterranean, a grizzled petty-officer, one of the two captains of the forecastle, dying at night in his hammock, swung in the sick-bay under the tiered gun-decks of the British Dreadnought, 98, wandering in his mind, though with glimpses of sanity, and starting up at whiles, sings by snatches his good-bye and last injunctions to two messmates, his watchers, one of whom fans the fevered tar with the flap of his old sou'-wester. Some names and phrases, with here and there a line, or part of one; these, in his aberration, wrested into incoherency from their original connection and import, he involuntarily derives, as he does the measure, from a famous old sea-ditty, whose cadences, long rife, and now humming in the collapsing brain, attune the last flutterings of distempered thought.
Farewell and adieu to you noble hearties,--
      Farewell and adieu to you ladies of Spain,
For I've received orders for to sail for the Deadman,
      But hope with the grand fleet to see you again.

I have hove my ship to, with main-top-sail aback, boys;
      I have hove my ship to, for to strike soundings clear--
The black scud a'flying; but, by God's blessing, dam' me,
      Right up the Channel for the Deadman I'll steer.

I have worried through the waters that are call d the Doldrums,
      And growled at Sargasso that clogs while ye grope--
Blast my eyes, but the light-ship is hid by the mist, lads:--
      Flying Dutchman--odds bobbs--off the Cape of Good Hope!

But what's this I feel that is fanning my cheek, Matt?
      The white goney's wing?--how she rolls!--'t is the Cape!
Give my kit to the mess, Jock, for kin none is mine, none;
      And tell Holy Joe to avast with the crape.

Dead reckoning, says Joe, it won't do to go by;
      But they doused all the glims, Matt, in sky t' other night.
Dead reckoning is good for to sail for the Deadman;
      And Tom Deadlight he thinks it may reckon near right.

The signal!--it streams for the grand fleet to anchor.
      The captains--the trumpets--the hullabaloo!
Stand by for blue-blazes, and mind your shank-painters,
      For the Lord High Admiral, he's squinting at you!

But give me my tot, Matt, before I roll over;
      Jock, let's have your flipper, it's good for to feel;
And don't sew me up without baccy in mouth, boys,
      And don't blubber like lubbers when I turn up my keel.
