The Barrel-Organ
Alfred Noyes
1880-1958

England
Nature, Music, Arts & Sciences, Trees & Flowers
Poems for Weddings

Rhymed Stanza, Refrain

There's a barrel-organ carolling across a golden street 
    In the City as the sun sinks low; 
And the music's not immortal; but the world has made it sweet
    And fulfilled it with the sunset glow;
And it pulses through the pleasures of the City and the pain 
    That surround the singing organ like a large eternal light; 
And they've given it a glory and a part to play again 
    In the Symphony that rules the day and night. 

And now it's marching onward through the realms of old romance 
    And trolling out a fond familiar tune, 
And now it's roaring cannon down to fight the King of France, 
    And now it's prattling softly to the moon, 
And all around the organ there's a sea without a shore 
    Of human joys and wonders and regrets;
To remember and to recompense the music evermore 
    For what the cold machinery forgets. . . . 

                  Yes; as the music changes, 
                      Like a prismatic glass, 
                  It takes the light and ranges 
                      Through all the moods that pass; 
                  Dissects the common carnival 
                      Of passions and regrets, 
                  And gives the world a glimpse of all 
                      The colours it forgets. 

                  And there La Traviata sighs 
                      Another sadder song; 
                  And there Il Trovatore cries 
                      A tale of deeper wrong; 
                  And bolder knights to battle go 
                      With sword and shield and lance, 
                  Than ever here on earth below 
                      Have whirled into--a dance!-- 

Go down to Kew in lilac-time, in lilac-time, in lilac-time;
   Go down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn't far from London!)
And you shall wander hand in hand with love in summer's wonderland;
   Go down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn't far from London!)

The cherry-trees are seas of bloom and soft perfume and sweet perfume, 
    The cherry-trees are seas of bloom (and oh, so near to London!)
And there they say, when dawn is high and all the world's a blaze of sky       
    The cuckoo, though he's very shy, will sing a song for London. 

The Dorian nightingale is rare and yet they say you'll hear him there 
    At Kew, at Kew in lilac-time (and oh, so near to London!)
The linnet and the throstle, too, and after dark the long halloo 
    And golden-eyed tu-whit, tu-whoo, of owls that ogle London. 

For Noah hardly knew a bird of any kind that isn't heard 
    At Kew, at Kew in lilac-time (and oh, so near to London!)
And when the rose begins to pout and all the chestnut spires are out 
    You'll hear the rest without a doubt, all chorussing for London:--

Come down to Kew in lilac-time, in lilac-time, in lilac-time; 
    Come down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn't far from London!) 
And you shall wander hand in hand with love in summer's wonderland; 
    Come down to Kew in lilac-time (it isn't far from London!)