Prometheus Unbound 
Percy Bysshe Shelley 
1792-1822
Romantic
England
Mythology & Folklore, Greek & Roman Mythology

Blank Verse

(excerpt)  SCENE.--A Ravine of Icy Rocks in the Indian Caucasus. Prometheus is discovered bound to the Precipice. Panthea and Ione are seated at his feet. Time, night. During the Scene, morning slowly breaks.
Prometheus. 
   Monarch of Gods and Daemons, and all Spirits 
But One, who throng those bright and rolling worlds 
Which Thou and I alone of living things 
Behold with sleepless eyes! regard this Earth 
Made multitudinous with thy slaves, whom thou 
Requitest for knee-worship, prayer, and praise, 
And toil, and hecatombs of broken hearts, 
With fear and self-contempt and barren hope. 
Whilst me, who am thy foe, eyeless in hate, 
Hast thou made reign and triumph, to thy scorn, 
O'er mine own misery and thy vain revenge. 
Three thousand years of sleep-unsheltered hours, 
And moments aye divided by keen pangs 
Till they seemed years, torture and solitude, 
Scorn and despair,--these are mine empire:-- 
More glorious far than that which thou surveyest 
From thine unenvied throne, O Mighty God! 
Almighty, had I deigned to share the shame 
Of thine ill tyranny, and hung not here 
Nailed to this wall of eagle-baffling mountain, 
Black, wintry, dead, unmeasured; without herb, 
Insect, or beast, or shape or sound of life. 
Ah me! alas, pain, pain ever, for ever! 

   No change, no pause, no hope! Yet I endure. 
I ask the Earth, have not the mountains felt? 
I ask yon Heaven, the all-beholding Sun, 
Has it not seen? The Sea, in storm or calm, 
Heaven's ever-changing Shadow, spread below, 
Have its deaf waves not heard my agony? 
Ah me! alas, pain, pain ever, for ever! 

   The crawling glaciers pierce me with the spears 
Of their moon-freezing crystals, the bright chains 
Eat with their burning cold into my bones. 
Heaven's winged hound, polluting from thy lips 
His beak in poison not his own, tears up 
My heart; and shapeless sights come wandering by, 
The ghastly people of the realm of dream, 
Mocking me: and the Earthquake-fiends are charged 
To wrench the rivets from my quivering wounds 
When the rocks split and close again behind: 
While from their loud abysses howling throng 
The genii of the storm, urging the rage 
Of whirlwind, and afflict me with keen hail. 
And yet to me welcome is day and night, 
Whether one breaks the hoar frost of the morn, 
Or starry, dim, and slow, the other climbs 
The leaden-coloured east; for then they lead 
The wingless, crawling hours, one among whom 
--As some dark Priest hales the reluctant victim-- 
Shall drag thee, cruel King, to kiss the blood 
From these pale feet, which then might trample thee 
If they disdained not such a prostrate slave. 
Disdain! Ah no! I pity thee. What ruin 
Will hunt thee undefended through wide Heaven! 
How will thy soul, cloven to its depth with terror, 
Gape like a hell within! I speak in grief, 
Not exultation, for I hate no more, 
As then ere misery made me wise. The curse 
Once breathed on thee I would recall. Ye Mountains, 
Whose many-voiced Echoes, through the mist 
Of cataracts, flung the thunder of that spell! 
Ye icy Springs, stagnant with wrinkling frost, 
Which vibrated to hear me, and then crept 
Shuddering through India! Thou serenest Air, 
Through which the Sun walks burning without beams! 
And ye swift Whirlwinds, who on poised wings 
Hung mute and moveless o'er yon hushed abyss, 
As thunder, louder than your own, made rock 
The orbed world! If then my words had power, 
Though I am changed so that aught evil wish 
Is dead within; although no memory be 
Of what is hate, let them not lose it now! 
What was that curse? for ye all heard me speak. 

