The Harpy 
Robert W. Service 
1874-1958

Canada
Gender & Sexuality, Social Commentaries

Common Measure

There was a woman, and she was wise; woefully wise was she; 
She was old, so old, yet her years all told were but a score and three; 
And she knew by heart, from finish to start, the Book of Iniquity. 
 

There is no hope for such as I on earth, nor yet in Heaven; 
Unloved I live, unloved I die, unpitied, unforgiven; 
A loathed jade, I ply my trade, unhallowed and unshriven. 

I paint my cheeks, for they are white, and cheeks of chalk men hate; 
Mine eyes with wine I make them shine, that man may seek and sate; 
With overhead a lamp of red I sit me down and wait 

Until they come, the nightly scum, with drunken eyes aflame; 
Your sweethearts, sons, ye scornful ones -- 'tis I who know their shame. 
The gods, ye see, are brutes to meiand so I play my game. 

For life is not the thing we thought, and not the thing we plan; 
And Woman in a bitter world must do the best she can -- 
Must yield the stroke, and bear the yoke, and serve the will of man; 

Must serve his need and ever feed the flame of his desire, 
Though be she loved for love alone, or be she loved for hire; 
For every man since life began is tainted with the mire. 

And though you know he love you so and set you on love's throne; 
Yet let your eyes but mock his sighs, and let your heart be stone, 
Lest you be left (as I was left) attainted and alone. 

From love's close kiss to hell's abyss is one sheer flight, I trow, 
And wedding ring and bridal bell are will-o'-wisps of woe, 
And 'tis not wise to love too well, and this all women know. 

Wherefore, the wolf-pack having gorged upon the lamb, their prey, 
With siren smile and serpent guile I make the wolf-pack pay -- 
With velvet paws and flensing claws, a tigress roused to slay. 

One who in youth sought truest truth and found a devil's lies; 
A symbol of the sin of man, a human sacrifice. 
Yet shall I blame on man the shame? Could it be otherwise? 

Was I not born to walk in scorn where others walk in pride? 
The Maker marred, and, evil-starred, I drift upon His tide; 
And He alone shall judge His own, so I His judgment bide. 

Fate has written a tragedy; its name is "The Human Heart." 
The Theatre is the House of Life, Woman the mummer's part; 
The Devil enters the prompter's box and the play is ready to start. 

