Murderer [Part I]
Curzio Malaparte
1898-1957

Italy
Living, Death, Social Commentaries, Crime & Punishment, War & Conflict
Poems for Weddings



I
  
 The whole of human history ... 
  
             The whole of human history 
             seems to be the story of men who kill,
             and of men who are killed;
             of murderers who light their cigarettes
             with trembling hands,
             and of poor, unlucky kids staring into the eyes
             of those who bring them their deaths.
  
             But history is not about murderers, after all.
             It is just the story of some poor kids.
             The whole history of the world
             is just the story of millions of poor kids
             overwhelmed by the fear of death, or
             by the fear of bringing death to others.
  
             My mother had closed her eyes
             and was breathing softly.
             Every so often, her right hand,
             abandoned on the white sheet,
             would shift slightly, opening and closing
             like the hand of a sleeping baby.
  
             The nurse came into the room just then,
             as I had begun to tell the story of Jaco.
             She opened the door as slowly as possible,
             but I felt her presence behind my shoulders
             bending over the bed,
             looking at my mother.
  
             She is sleeping, said the nurse.
             Don't wake her.
  
             I didn't turn around,
             but continued my story in a low whisper.
             When I got to the part about the grenade,
             I heard the nurse tiptoeing out,
             closing the door behind her,
  
             silently.
  
 The grenade exploded a few feet away, while Jaco was helping to carry two wounded soldiers down the hill to the hospital tent. By the time I got to him, he was stretched out on the grass, breathing heavily. Everyone around him had been killed. He watched as I approached, and when I was close, he smiled.
     He had just been promoted to lieutenant, even though he had not yet turned nineteen. Six months ago, when we were getting ready to leave Italy, Ercolani had taken me aside and said: Look out for Jaco. He's like a brother to me. Make sure nothing bad happens to him.
     I was irritated: War isn't a game. It doesn't play by the rules. If something bad happens to him, tough luck.
