Deola Thinking 
Cesare Pavese 
1908-1950

Italy
Living, Health & Illness, Disappointment & Failure, Relationships, Love, Activities, Eating & Drinking

Free Verse

Deola passes her mornings sitting in a cafe, 
and nobody looks at her. Everyone's rushing to work, 
under a sun still fresh with the dawn. Even Deola 
isn't looking for anyone: she smokes serenely, breathing 
the morning. In years past, she slept at this hour 
to recover her strength: the throw on her bed 
was black with the boot-prints of soldiers and workers, 
the backbreaking clients. But now, on her own, 
it's different: the work's more refined, and it's easier. 
Like the gentleman yesterday, who woke her up early, 
kissed her, and took her (I'd stay awhile, dear, 
in Turin with you, if I could) to the station 
to tell him goodbye. 
                              She's dazed this morning, but fresh-- 
Deola likes being free, likes drinking her milk 
and eating brioches. This morning she's nearly a lady, 
and if she looks at anyone now, it's just to pass the time. 
The girls at the house are still sleeping. The air stinks, 
the madam goes out for a walk, it's crazy to stay there. 
To work the bars in the evening you have to look good; 
at that house, by thirty, you've lost what little looks you had left. 

Deola sits with her profile turned toward a mirror 
and looks at herself in the cool of the glass: her face pale, 
and not from the smoke; her brow a bit furrowed. 
To survive at that house, you'd need a will 
like Mari used to have (because, honey, these men 
come here to get something they can't get at home 
from their wives or their lovers) and Mari used to work 
tirelessly, full of good cheer and blessed with good health. 
The people who pass the cafe aren't distracting Deola-- 
she only works evenings, making slow conquests 
to music, in her usual bar. She'll make eyes. 
at a client, or nudge his foot, while enjoying the band 
that makes her seem like an actress doing a love scene 
with a young millionaire. One client each evening 
is enough to scrape by on. (Maybe that gentleman from last night 
really will take me with him.) To be alone, if she wants, 
in the morning. To sit in a cafe. To not look for anyone.
