The Western Emigrant 
Lydia Huntley Sigourney 
1791-1865

U.S., New, England
Relationships, Home Life, Family & Ancestors, Activities, Travels & Journeys, Nature, Social Commentaries, History & Politics



An axe rang sharply 'mid those forest shades 
Which from creation toward the skies had tower'd 
In unshorn beauty. There, with vigorous arm 
Wrought a bold emigrant, and by his side 
His little son, with question and response, 
Beguiled the toil. 
                         'Boy, thou hast never seen 
Such glorious trees. Hark, when their giant trunks 
Fall, how the firm earth groans. Rememberest thou 
The mighty river, on whose breast we sail'd, 
So many days, on toward the setting sun? 
Our own Connecticut, compar'd to that, 
Was but a creeping stream.' 
                                         'Father, the brook 
That by our door went singing, where I launch'd 
My tiny boat, with my young playmates round, 
When school was o'er, is dearer far to me, 
Than all these bold, broad waters. To my eye 
They are as strangers. And those little trees 
My mother nutur'd in the garden bound, 
Of our first home, from whence the fragrant peach   
Hung in its ripening gold, were fairer sure, 
Than this dark forest, shutting out the day.' 
--'What, ho! - my little girl,' and with light step
A fairy creature hasted toward her sire, 
And setting down the basket that contain'd 
His noon-repast, look'd upward to his face 
With sweet, confiding smile. 
                                         'See, dearest, see, 
That bright-wing'd paroquet, and hear the song 
Of yon gay red-bird, echoing through the trees, 
Making rich music. Didst thou ever hear, 
In far New England, such a mellow tone?' 
--'I had a robin that did take the crumbs 
Each night and morning, and his chirping voice 
Still made me joyful, as I went to tend 
My snow-drops. I was always laughing then 
In that first home. I should be happier now 
Methinks, if I could find among these dells 
The same fresh violets.' 
                                   Slow night drew on, 
And round the rude hut of the Emigrant 
The wrathful spirit of the rising storm 
Spake bitter things. His weary children slept, 
And he, with head declin'd, sat listening long 
To the swoln waters of the Illinois, 
Dashing against their shores. 
                                          Starting he spake,--
'Wife! did I see thee brush away a tear? 
'Twas even so. Thy heard was with the halls 
Of thy nativity. Their sparkling lights, 
Carpets, and sofas, and admiring guests, 
Befit thee better than these rugged walls 
Of shapeless logs, and this lone, hermit home.' 
   'No - no. All was so still around, methought 
Upon mine ear that echoes hymn did steal, 
Which 'mid the Church where erst we paid our vows, 
So tuneful peal'd. But tenderly thy voice 
Dissolv'd the illusion.' 
                                And the gentle smile 
Lighting her brow, the fond caress that sooth'd 
Her waking infant, reassur'd his soul 
That wheresoe'er our best affections dwell, 
And strike a healthful root, is happiness. 
Content, and placid, to his rest he sank, 
But dreams, those wild magicians, that do play 
Such pranks when reason slumbers, tireless wrought 
Their will with him. 
                            Up rose the thronging mart 
Of his own native city, - roof and spire, 
All glittering bright, in fancy's frost-work ray. 
The steed his boyhood nurtur'd proudly neigh'd, 
The favorite dog came frisking round his feet, 
With shrill and joyous bark, - familiar doors 
Flew open, - greeting hands with his were link'd 
In friendship's grasp, - he heard the keen debate 
From congregated haunts, where mind with mind 
Doth blend and brighten, - and till morning rov'd 
'Mid the loved scenery of his native land.

