La Belle Dame sans Merci: A Ballad 
John Keats 
1795-1821
Romantic
England
Relationships, Living, Sorrow & Grieving, Love, Ghosts & the Supernatural, Mythology & Folklore, Fairy-tales & Legends, Romantic Love, Classic Love, Desire, Infatuation & Crushes, Unrequited Love, Heartache & Loss

Ballad

O what can ail thee, knight-at-arms, 
       Alone and palely loitering? 
The sedgesedge Grasslike or rushlike plant that grows in wet areas. has withered from the lake, 
       And no birds sing. 

O what can ail thee, knight-at-arms, 
       So haggardhaggard Wild looking and so woe-begonebegone To happen, occur, transpire ? 
The squirrel's granary is full, 
       And the harvest's done. 

I see a lily on thy brow, 
       With anguish moist and fever-dew, 
And on thy cheeks a fading rose 
       Fast withereth too. 

I met a lady in the meadsmeads Meadow , 
       Full beautiful--a faery's child, 
Her hair was long, her foot was light, 
       And her eyes were wild. 

I made a garland for her head, 
       And bracelets too, and fragrant zone; 
She looked at me as she did love, 
       And made sweet moanmade sweet moan Compare "virgin-choir to make delicious moan" from Ode to Psyche (30), written between April 21 and 30, 1819. Noted by John Barnard in John Keats: The Complete Poems (Penguin, 2003).  

I set her on my pacing steed, 
       And nothing else saw all day long, 
For sidelong would she bend, and sing 
       A faery's song. 

She found me roots of relish sweet, 
       And honey wild, and manna-dewhoney wild, and manna-dew Echoes manna in the Bible, first described in Exodus, 16:14-21, 31. The Israelites eat the manna, a food miraculously supplied in the wilderness after the dew has lifted, in the morning: "The house of Israel called it manna; it was like coriander seed, white, and the taste of it was like wafers made with honey" (Exodus 16:31, NRSV)., 
And sure in language strange she said-- 
       'I love thee true'. 

She took me to her Elfin grotElfin grot An elf's grotto , 
       And there she wept and sighed full sore, 
And there I shut her wild wild eyes 
       With kisses four. 

And there she lulled me asleep, 
       And there I dreamed--Ah! woe betide!-- 
The latest dream I ever dreamt 
       On the cold hill side. 

I saw pale kings and princes too, 
       Pale warriors, death-pale were they all; 
They cried--'La Belle Dame sans MerciLa Belle Dame sans Merci This phrase--and the poem's title--is from Alain Chartier's courtly French ballad, "La Belle Dame sans Merci" (1424). Keats wrote the poem in a letter to George and Georgiana Keats, April 21, 1819. 
       Thee hathThee hath The version of this poem has "Thee hath" (see The Letters of John Keats, 1814-1821, ed. H. E. Rollins, 1958); though other versions of this poem reads "Hath thee" in thrall!' 

I saw their starved lips in the gloamgloam Twilight; Keats coined the word from "gloaming", 
       With horrid warning gaped wide, 
And I awoke and found me here, 
       On the cold hill's side. 

And this is why I sojournsojourn To stay or visit temporarily here, 
       Alone and palely loitering, 
Though the sedge is withered from the lake, 
       And no birds sing.
