O Black and Unknown Bards 
James Weldon Johnson 
1871-1938
Harlem Renaissance
U.S., Southern
Religion, God & the Divine, Christianity, Arts & Sciences, Poetry & Poets, Music, Social Commentaries, History & Politics, Race & Ethnicity



O Black and unknown bards of long ago,
How came your lips to touch   the sacred fire?
How, in your darkness, did you come to know
The   power and beauty of the minstrel's lyre?
Who first from midst his   bonds lifted his eyes?
Who first from out the still watch, lone and   long,
Feeling the ancient faith of prophets rise
Within his   dark-kept soul, burst into song?

Heart of what slave poured out   such melody
As   "Steal Away to Jesus"? On its strains
His spirit must have nightly   floated free,
Though still about his hands he felt his chains.
Who   heard great "Jordan roll"? Whose starward eye
Saw chariot "swing   low"? And who was he
That breathed that comforting, melodic sigh,
"Nobody   knows de trouble I see"?

What merely living clod, what captive   thing,
Could up toward God through all its darkness grope,
And   find within its deadened heart to sing
These songs of sorrow, love,   and faith, and hope?
How did it catch that subtle undertone,
That   note in music heard not with the ears?
How sound the elusive reed, so   seldom blown,
Which stirs the soul or melts the heart to tears?

Not   that great German master in his dream
Of harmonies that thundered   'mongst the stars
At the creation, ever heard a theme
Nobler than   "Go down, Moses." Mark its bars,
How like a mighty trumpet-call they   stir
The blood. Such are the notes that men have sung,
Going to   valorous deeds; such tones there were
That helped make history when   Time was young.

There is a wide, wide wonder in it all,
That   from degraded rest and service toil
The fiery spirit of the seer   should call
These simple children of the sun and soil.
O black   slave singers, gone, forgot, unfamed,
You--you alone, of all the long,   long line
Of those who've sung untaught, unknown, unnamed,
Have   stretched out upward, seeking the divine.

You sang not deeds of   heroes or of kings;
No chant of bloody war, no exulting paean
Of   arms-won triumphs; but your humble strings
You touched in chord with   music empyrean.
You sang far better than you knew; the songs
That   for your listeners' hungry hearts sufficed
Still live,--but more than   this to you belongs:
You sang a race from wood and stone to Christ.
