Hotel Francois 1er 
Gertrude Stein 
1874-1946
Modern

Friends & Enemies, Relationships, Cities & Urban Life, Social Commentaries, Men & Women, Arts & Sciences, Language & Linguistics

Prose Poem

					
					It was a very little while and they had gone in front of it. It was that they had liked it would it bear. It was a very much adjoined a follower. Flower of an adding where a follower.     Have I come in. Will in suggestion.     They may like hours in catching.     It is always a pleasure to remember.     Have a habit.     Any name will very well wear better.     All who live round about there.     Have a manner.     The hotel Francois Ier.     Just winter so.     It is indubitably often that she is as denied to soften help to when it is in all in midst of which in vehemence to taken given in a bestowal show than left help in double.     Having noticed often that it is newly noticed which makes older often.     The world has become smaller and more beautiful.     The world is grown smaller and more beautiful. That is it.       Yes that is it.     If he liked to live elsewhere that was natural.     If he was accompanied.     Place praise places.     But you do.       Partly for you.     Will he he wild in having a room soon. He was not very welcome. Safety in their choice.     Amy whether they thought much of merry. I do marry del Val.     I know how many do walk too.     It was a while that they did wait for them to have an apple.     An apple.     She may do this for the Hotel Lion d'Or.   II      Buy me yesterday for they may adhere to coffee.       It is without doubt no pleasure to walk about.   III      The romance of the Hotel Francois premier is this that it was seen on a Saturday.   IV      In snatches     A little a boy was three, two of them were three others.     She may be right I told her. I thought it well to tell her. They told them. They were avoiding nothing. And so.     Do they and are they will they for them to be remarkable.     Now think.   V      Repose while she does.   VI     An aided advantage in touch with delight.     VII      Just as they will have by nearly whether.     What is the difference between a thing seen and what do you mean.     Regularly in narrative.     Who is interested in Howard's mother or in Kitty's mother or in James as George. Dear James as George.     A target.     Those of course of us who have forgotten war have been mean.       I mean I mean was not spoken of the sun.     Do think of the sun.   VIII      A chance to have no noise in or because.   IX      They change being interested there to being interested there.     Hotel Francois Ier      To and two to be true.     They will be with me     To have you     To be true to this     And to have them     To be true     They will have them to be true   X      Just as they were ten.   XI      Who made them then.     Which made him.     Do they come then     Welcome     Join and just and join and just join them with and then.     It is very often that they are dissolved in tears.   XII      Should it show where they are mine.                                   And his care.     It was that they might place them all of them.       Just why they do so.     To call Howard seated.     I never leave Howard.   Hotel White Bird      She may be like that     Do     For me to choose.   II      Our just as assume     Leave riches with her       Are dovetail an origin       With wood.   III      But she     Can go clearly     To pieces     By adding act one     By add may meant scene one.       Left done right and left done.     She will never think in pointing in property inviting.   IV      Just shown as their agent.   V      Just shown.     As their     Agent.   VI      Mutter.   VII      They will read better   VIII      With other   IX      They have known a platter better.       Thank you   My dear        My dear     How are you       This is for you.       Dear     How are you       This is     For you     How are you       My dear     How     My dear     How are you.   II      Love which     Love which     To love which     Which to love which     My dear how are you.   III      Just why they went.     They went     They were to have gone     And they did go     And they went.     What did they do.     How are you     My dear     How do you do     How are you.   IV      Oh choose the better     Oh choose you     Oh choose for you   V      She made it better.   VI      By the choice of more     That is why     My dear     You are     Better     How are you       How do you do       You are better       Two.   VII      She meant well.   VIII      Much better   IX      Very much better       Well.   X      She had eight     As the date     Full date     We date     We have to relate     The cause     Of bringing     It for her     It was light     As weight.     But she enjoyed it.     For it was     Not more than     Not too late   XI      Not at all   XII      She is very well I thank you.   For them      Just joined James.     In no way a disappointment.     They must have met with them which was in the capacity to lead and leave.     Our house contains. That is made back with idem. Idem the same just please come and claim our house as a lot which we have in a home. This is what made a pioneer.     Leave a nature to rain.     It makes no difference if they use it.     A narrative oh how often have I thought that a narrative.       How often will a narrative do.     Complain about fifty narratives perfectly.     He is waiting not for his food but for his appointment. Dear dear.     Plenty of bread and butter.     He is waiting not for his food.     Resignation does not mean narrative.     He is to come welcome, as well as having left welcome is not a narrative but foolishly.     I was completely persuaded by Mrs. Tolstoy but she told me.       She was completely persuaded by William but she told me.       How should either have been headed very often.     That is astonishing a narrative and I would so much rather be poetical.     For me.     I love poetical history for me.     I love poetical and still for me.     I love poetical will poetical for me by me.     The best of wishes     He wishes he came away he wishes.     Just why he wishes.     Joined by     He wishes.     A narrative of relieve     He wishes.  Think William Poetical      So few this further.       I will reward     An error     Of regard.   Hotel Francois Ier      Was there     A surprise     In nearly not to face     Imagine     That the name     Was the same.   I      How far are you not to leave them.     I      With a colored message to know colors were. To know there his coloring there.   I      She made no mistake. To take not only with it. When she came to mend they say.   I      Garments were a separate desire pleasure. She made hours a desired separated measure. With them they actually considered why it is a treasure. Must it become be how even much with pleasure.   I      She used pleasure exactly.   II      They are neither here or there.   II      Or there it mostly widened for in invite there. Them there who how did it. Do this for them.   II      Should it be shown. No how who ever coupled a dog out of a pleasure or round. Around. See me a round. It is polite. Let us congratulate ice rice.   II      They made no mistake to be indifferent. How which come faithfully or. Will it be easy. Not for me.   II      Adjust, add edge to adjoin wine. Wine is a drink. Water. Watered wine. We weigh wine.   III      They must expect one of you.     III      She may expect two of you.     III      What does she expect       You to do.   IV      Come with me and sit with me   V      I am afraid if she waits longer it will do her an injury.     Forests      She liked forests in a pity.   I      With forest too.   II      Will forests do.   III      What is it a pity will forests pretty.     IV      Forests are there   V      Saturday   VI      She must be without it   a      Old when   b      A forest deer   c      Makes it pay me   d      To call her.   With them      When they came in some one was waiting       When they arrived they said something       Some one was waiting when they came in.   Just Church      We stay gathered     With them intentionally     Have they met them     With Church     Just as if in incompetence     I must have leaving weather     As much with confidence     In Church.   Regularity      Be wider with lather       Rather a darkening     Of with gather     That they will     Suffice     Just why     They have this     As mother be occasion     To have rejoiced then ring     A bell soon.     She must be just which they do.       Outright.   Behave      Why cups of butter.     They will     In the morning     Happen     To be fatter.   Articles      Drop him for me.     Does wish.   Tidy      They make her mending large     To have a doll       Do be careless       In hope     Of pointing     Their dispatch       Of hurry     Hurry and come in.     It is of no use.       Hours of trying       That is what breaks     In cups with more rather     Than     They wish.     Do I know whether she has come in or out.   How ours      Very fairly selfish     Some sealed fake ponds       Very much as they hear like     May down in implied   Shells      Ears if they accustom to born     With counted help her     I do not think better help is ugly     By which     In win.     Just why a repelled for her       They might in nature       Come for     They caress     A dove tailed     In succeeding.     Nobody knows me.       Our too.   She is my bride      They make safety in seventy plus fourteen. As known as never hearing figures.      What will she see when she hears me.      It is after.       All mine.      Powers in because of up with their resource.     Careful      There is no use in eiderdown     But yes     Leaves which have been that they can win       With yes.     To guess     Would she choose what he would use.       He asked tell her to judge when       And because it is fine.   Allan      Allan Ullman knew me     He was prepared next of kin       To sink and swim     With magnifying carving       Should make     It is well to have held a pillow       Or other corals   At fourteen      It is extraordinary     That she made fourteen       And will make fourteen       And does fourteen sixteen       Gradually     It is extraordinary.   How are they hoping      It is old to think of welcome heavy women     She was fourteen.     They liked to have owls look unlike a pigeon they do look like. That is a pigeon can be mistaken. For an owl.   How many things happen        A great many things happen   Every time      Every time they mix they make it different women       Who has sung men.     Do be careful of sung.     Checkers among.     Half of them sung,     Every time they changed they forgot all they bought.       However they bought.     It is very not useful but exceptional.   A part      Allan Ullman who knew me.     Separately from three his brother mother and father. He knew me. He said when he knew me he separately regretted one two three not he.   Our page      How could it be a little whatever he liked.     Morning glories      He made as stable morning glories     For the next to handle       Their regret.     Morning glories were eighteen to the dozen     Forty made fifteen.     Everybody who has been for them.     In add her add coming.       Too many thousands     I have a link with a king.   Francis Rose      Shut up     And stay shut     Where they drink all the better     For families of yet get her     With them in ravishes     Between them with dishes     And they came then with her     In precious labor with love     He may yet get wealth in getting tender       Which they make stronger     With us     Thank you.     How many cakes make jell for jelly     And how many loves make bless     A little flower of rather think better embellishment.       Just why join mass     A mass is a towing to a lock.     At towed they devise       How to a challenge.     Challenge has nothing to do with him.     How are heads held Howard.     She cooked and seized.       Cooked and seized     She cooked and seized.       Forbearance     Cooked and seized.       Bridle is paths.     Just as about a path       Just as a path     Just as a path.     It makes no difference whether four     Ate one.     Sum to sum.     Our adding is more hours.     Ate one     Just as well ate one       Just as well eight one       Just as well eight       One just as well       Eight one.     How much are they like me     Like.     After walked.     Before walked     He made her talk       To have her     Walk     After walked     And leave a walk     Leave walk     Or leave her leave walked.     It is an error     Oh.     Join me     With observation       She may be     Our hour glass     Which we sought       And have not bought       For our hour be       Be an hour for me.       Such is sought     And here bought       For our be     Her be     Err be     Come Francis Rose       Or be     Forty leave fifteen       Thrilled be     Or sought by     It for him     Or for     Her     For him to be       When they may       They may     Shall shelter     They make     Shelter     As they may be       For and to be     Nobody knows how old showers are.       Or how should hours should be.     In inlay should be       That with mean     With be     With held will then     In to be.     What is a square.   She should be      What could it prove     If it made no difference       To them   Dear dog      Dear dog     What do and does it leave       Dear dog.     He likes to see     Dear dog     But did he know it was he.       Leave dear dog where he is       Otherwise it is.     Not satisfied.   With him      Just why they ate       In state     With him.   Why does it come like that      He so happily is present.       When it comes like that.       From him     She so pleasantly is present       When it has come from him.       She so happily is present.       When it comes from him       So happily from him     When it comes so happily out of him.   He says obey      I obey which is to say     They come to-day.     And she closes the door       With delay.     But will     To happen to happen yes.       She sits with him for him       We know the difference   Than      I little thought of how it went       When they were told     It had been better with them       Than     Just yet.   Better heeded      Should rejoice be to arrange     Will they tell they until they are strange     Let them be for me to estrange     That they will until they change     For them will they until they have caught it to arrange       They will estrange     Because they can be blamed for the arrangement of their change to change and arrange to be strange and well intended to come to derange them then for them in abundance to them in a vice, who held them     In a vice     Twice     To them to arrange     For them it is strange     That to them for them     They arrange     In them for a vessel which is meant a book       A book look twice     He held him twice       To make him twice       Shake dice     To be thought tranquil       In their wear     Aware     Come catch with capable       To be to like     A tree     For them capable       Underwent in anger       One     Two     Three     They must be sensibly made with them for them       Three     Ultimately       She might hinder       All of them     Ultimately cornered       All of them as meant       In clouds     Who ate them     Three     Ultimately     Made in generosity       For them to have it       In undertaking     Restively     She might be wonderful       Ultimately       They might in undertaking     Shall he have pleasure       Ultimately     In their recognising       Why they were often       Just as much as three     Which they may would     It may weight wood       For them ultimately       Better than could.       It might be careful       Who has made them     Who might have made them       Ultimately careful       With them.     For them.
				