 
Music is most sovereign because more than anything  else, rhythm and harmony find their way to the inmost  soul and take strongest hold upon it, bringing with  them and imparting grace. --Plato, The Republic  The cranes are flying ... --Chekhov 
And here it comes: around the world, 
In Chicago, Petersburg, Tokyo, the dancers 
Hit the floor running (the communal dancefloor 

Here, there, at intervals, sometimes paved,   
Sometimes rotted linoleum awash in beer,   
Sometimes a field across which the dancers streak 

Like violets across grass, sometimes packed dirt   
In a township of corrugated metal roofs) 
And what was once prescribed ritual, the profuse 

Strains of premeditated art, is now improvisation,   
The desperately new, where to the sine-curved   
Yelps and spasms of police sirens outside 

The club, a spasmodic feedback ululates   
The death and cremation of history,   
Until a boy whose hair is purple spikes, 

And a girl wearing a skull 
That wants to say I'm cool but I'm in pain, 
Get up and dance together, sort of, age thirteen. 

Young allegorists, they'll mime motions 
Of shootouts, of tortured ones in basements,   
Of cold insinuations before sex 

Between enemies, the jubilance of the criminal.   
The girl tosses her head and dances   
The shoplifter's meanness and self-betrayal 

For a pair of stockings, a scarf, a perfume,   
The boy dances stealing the truck,   
Shooting his father. 

The point is to become a flying viper,   
A diving vulva, the great point 
Is experiment, like pollen flinging itself 

Into far other habitats, or seed   
That travels a migrant bird's gut   
To be shit overseas. 

The creatures gamble on the whirl of life   
And every adolescent body hot 
Enough to sweat it out on the dance floor 

Is a laboratory: maybe this lipstick, these boots,   
These jeans, these earrings, maybe if I flip   
My hair and vibrate my pelvis 

Exactly synched to the band's wildfire noise   
That imitates history's catastrophe   
Nuke for nuke, maybe I'll survive, 

Maybe we'll all survive. . . . 

At the intersection of poverty and plague 
The planet's children--brave, uncontrollable, juiced   
Out of their gourds--invent the sacred dance. 