 
The oldest sister, her two hands on the table,   
about to push herself up, stares with grim   
determination at the affronting dishes,   
waiting, it seems, until the middle sister   
finishes her story, so she can clear them away.   
Her gaze so tense with purpose she can almost   
see germs spawning in the mess of white fish   
flaking from the spines, the smear of egg yolk   
and the torn rolls disfiguring the china;   
as if the meal, the moment it is over, 
the meal she made a point of telling them   
she shopped for, got up early to prepare,   
were now inedible, because uneaten. 
It's no great comfort either that her brother   
sitting opposite holds up a flared match   
over the pipe from which smoke rolls away   
across the table like a phantom mold 
in and around the open tub of butter, 
the gouged block of cream cheese and the coffee cups;   
so in a moment when she finally does stand 

she'll say again, as always, For love or money   
in my mouth I'd never put such filth,   
and he'll say, winking at the middle sister,   
That's what she said on her honeymoon. 

The youngest sister is sitting on the couch 
behind the table; her face--sheer disengagement,   
toneless and still--appears to hang suspended   
beyond the oldest sister's shoulder, far   
enough away for no one yet to notice   
as her legs cross that the ashtray in her lap   
spills ash over the sunflowers of her housedress.   
Or that the cigarette between her fingers   
sags loosely and is dangling while the hand   
lifts like a puppet's on a string of smoke. 

Her death is just three months away. 

Even though it's summer (otherwise 
the brother and middle sister would be home,   
in Florida), summer and late morning-- 
with sunlight only just now catching on 
a corner of the window shut behind them, 
shut against the smog, the steady traffic 
and the panicked blare and drawn-out whining fade   
of sirens--the apartment is still quiet, 
still cool enough, right now, to keep the body   
in the wavering frail zone of what it needs 
to be forgotten, so they can sit like this 
together, with the oldest sister's sharp eye 
on the wrecked meal, the brother and sister talking: 

Listen, she would be saying, listen, Charlie,   
her elbows on the table, both hands open,   
the body fashioned to the voice's weary   
What can you do? What are ya gonna do?   
in answer to some story of a cousin's   
sudden illness (And he was my age, just 
like that one day he's shaving with the toothpaste), 
or a friend's death (That one, she didn't care   
how sick she got, she always had her hair done),   
his back pain, her arthritis, or the daughter   
who won't diet (And she'd be such a beauty!);   
after his joke about the nurse, and hers   
about the bedpan, Listen, they each say,   
Listen, what are ya gonna do? 

                                              "The Schmo, 
he never should've married her, for Christ sake,   
until he told her that he had a problem,   
that was his first mistake, then he goes   
throwing away his pills, because he's happy   
he doesn't need them anymore, the schmo,   
so of course what happens is she wakes up   
and finds him weeping at the kitchen table, 
just weeping, he doesn't know why, he won't eat,   
won't get dressed, says he's quittin' his job, 
you know, nuts, nuts, so naturally she leaves him,   
the poor schmo, and he's such a good boy . . . " 

All of the harm that's imperceptibly 
but surely coming for them (the way the sun 
burns brick by brick all morning toward the window   
like a slow fuse)--all of the bad news now 
is in the body only enough to hold 
the middle sister's two hands open, shrug 
her shoulders in a way they recognize   
as hers, the way their mother did; as if   
all trouble were, for now, no heavier   
than the familiar voice repeating, Listen,   
Listen it could be worse; So who's to say?; 
What was, was; When your number's up--like old charms   
woven around each story till they've made   
what happens what was only meant to happen,   
coherent with fate, fated as family. 

After the funeral three months from now,   
they'll have to listen to the oldest sister 
tell them they had no business moving away   
to Florida, and Irene sick as she was.   
And selfish. She was selfish, that one. After   
all those years of living with that bum, 
her husband, may his cheap soul rest in peace,   
didn't she deserve a little pleasure? 
And anyway, what could be done for her?   
Didn't the stroke just make it easier 
for her to sit all day, and smoke, and not care   
ashes were falling on the couch, the carpet; 
her bathrobe filthy, filthy? Oh it was terrible-- 
and now they will hear the old unfairnesses,   
old feuds and resentments come to her voice   
like consolation, like a mother helping   
her recite the story of that last bad day-- 
all that smoke, and running in with nothing   
but the dishtowel to beat down the flames,   
and Irene, just Irene, just sitting there, 
the queen of Sheba--What difference did it make   
since she was there, she was always there,   
her big sister, to clean up the mess? 

Only three months, and yet it could be years,   
or decades, for the sun has only just now 
caught in the window, and its bright plaque warms   
the air so gradually that none of them 
can know it's warming, or that soon someone,   
distracted by a faint sheen prickling the skin,   
will break the story, look up toward the window   
and, startled by the full glare, check the time.   
Right now, though, the future is a luxury   
of instances in which the cigarette, 
raised halfway to the lips, will go on rising.   
Nothing bad, right now, can happen here   
except as news, bad news the brother and sister   
mull and rehearse, puzzle and fret until   
it seems the very telling of it is 
what keeps them safe. And safe, too, the oldest sister,   
dreaming of all the perishables sealed,   
wrapped up and hurried back into the fridge's   
uncontaminated airlessness, 
dreaming of how the soapsuds curdle and slide   
over the dishes in a soothing fury, 
not minding that it scalds her hands to hold   
each plate and cup and bowl under the hot,   
hard jet of water, if it gets them clean.