 
What should the wars do with these jigging fools?
The man behind the book may not be man, 
His own man or the book's or yet the time's, 
But still be whole, deciding what he can 
In praise of politics or German rimes;

But the intellectual lights a cigarette
And offers it lit to the lady, whose odd smile 
Is the merest hyphen?lest he should forget 
What he has been resuming all the while.

He talks to overhear, she to withdraw
To some interior feminine fireside
Where the back arches, beauty puts forth a paw 
Like a black puma stretching in velvet pride,

Making him think of cats, a stray of which 
Some days sets up a howling in his brain, 
Pure interference such as this neat bitch 
Seems to create from listening disdain.

But talk is all the value, the release,
Talk is the very fillip of an act,
The frame and subject of the masterpiece 
Under whose film of age the face is cracked.

His own forehead glows like expensive wood, 
But back of it the mind is disengaged,
Self-sealing clock recording bad and good 
At constant temperature, intact, unaged.

But strange, his body is an open house 
Inviting every passerby to stay;
The city to and fro beneath his brows
Wanders and drinks and chats from night to day.

Think of a private thought, indecent room 
Where one might kiss his daughter before bed! 
Life is embarrassed; shut the family tomb, 
Console your neighbor for his recent dead;

Do something! die in Spain or paint a green 
Gouache, go into business (Rimbaud did), 
Or start another Little Magazine,
Or move in with a woman, have a kid.

Invulnerable, impossible, immune,
Do what you will, your will will not be done 
But dissipate the light of afternoon
Till evening flickers like the midnight sun,

And midnight shouts and dies: I'd rather be 
A milkman walking in his sleep at dawn 
Bearing fat quarts of cream, and so be free, 
Crossing alone and cold from lawn to lawn.

I'd rather be a barber and cut hair
Than walk with you in gilt museum halls, 
You and the puma-lady, she so rare 
Exhaling her silk soul upon the walls.

Go take yourselves apart, but let me be 
The fault you find with everyman. I spit, 
I laugh, I fight; and you, l'homme qui rit;
Swallow your stale saliva, and still sit.