 
(Goring, head of the Luftwaffe, once bragged that if one German city were bombed, they could call him "Meier." At his Karinhall estate, he questions himself and his disgrace.)
And why, Herr Reichsmarschall, is Italy   
Just like schnitzel? If they're beaten   
Either one will just get bigger. 
Neither cuts too firm a figure. 
Still, all this humble pie you've eaten   
Lately, fills you out quite prettily. 

Why then, Herr Goring, how can we   
Tell you and Italy apart? 
Italy always wins through losing; 
I, just the opposite, by using 
High skills and cunning learned the art   
Of flat pratfalls through victory. 

You've led our Flying Circus; how   
Could our war ace turn to a clown?   
Both pad out over-extended fronts;   
Both keep alive doing slick stunts   
And, even so, both get shot down.   
But only one's called "Meier" now. 

Pray, could an old, soft football be   
Much like a man in deep disgrace?   
They don't kick back; don't even dare   
Look up--the British own the air!   
Then, stick a needle in someplace;   
Pump yourself full of vacancy. 

Tell us, dear Minister for Air, 
Are warriors, then, like a bad smell? 
Neither stays inside its borders; 
Either's bound to follow ordures; 
They both expand and play the swell 
Though something's getting spoiled somewhere. 

Then answer one more question, which is   
Are politicians like whipped cream? 
They both inflate themselves with gas;   
Also they both puff up your ass 
Till you're exposed like some bad dream   
Where you've grown too big for your britches. 

Herr President, can't we tell apart   
An artful statesman and an ass? 
Fat chance! One spouts out high ideals;   
One makes low rumblings after meals.   
But that's the threat of leaking gas   
Which all men fear! No; that's a fart. 

Last, could you give one simple rule   
To tell a medal from a turd? 
No. They both come from those above you   
Conveying their opinion of you. 
Right! Here's your new medal, conferred   
For vast achievements: April Fool!