 
(...after my Mother's death)
Here not long enough after the hospital happened   
I find her closet lying empty and stop my play   
And go in and crane up at three blackwire hangers   
Which quiver, airy, released. They appear to enjoy 

Their new distance, cognizance born of the absence   
Of anything else. The closet has been cleaned out   
Full-flush as surgeries where the hangers could be   
Amiable scalpels though they just as well would be 

Themselves, in basements, glovelessly scraping uteri   
But, here, pure, transfigured heavenward, they're 
Birds, whose wingspans expand by excluding me. Their   
Range is enlarged by loss. They'd leave buzzards 

Measly as moths: and the hatshelf is even higher!-- 
As the sky over a prairie, an undotted desert where   
Nothing can swoop sudden, crumple in secret. I've fled   
At ambush, tag, age: six, must I face this, can 

I have my hide-and-seek hole back now please, the   
Clothes, the thicket of shoes, where is it? Only   
The hangers are at home here. Come heir to this   
Rare element, fluent, their skeletal grace sings 

Of the ease with which they let go the dress, slip,   
Housecoat or blouse, so absolvingly. Free, they fly 
Trim, triangular, augurs leapt ahead from some geometric   
God who soars stripped (of flesh, it is said): catnip 

To a brat placated by model airplane kits kids 
My size lack motorskills for, I wind up glue-scabbed,   
Pawing goo-goo fingernails, glaze skins fun to peer in as 
Frost-i-glass doors ... But the closet has no windows, 

Opaque or sheer: I must shut my eyes, shrink within   
To peep into this wall. Soliciting sleep I'll dream   
Mother spilled and cold, unpillowed, the operating- 
Table cracked to goad delivery: its stirrups slack, 

Its forceps closed: by it I'll see mobs of obstetrical   
Personnel kneel proud, congratulatory, cooing 
And oohing and hold the dead infant up to the dead   
Woman's face as if for approval, the prompted 

Beholding, tears, a zoomshot kiss. White-masked   
Doctors and nurses patting each other on the back,   
Which is how in the Old West a hangman, if 
He was good, could gauge the heft of his intended ... 

Awake, the hangers are sharper, knife-'n'-slice, I jump   
Helplessly to catch them to twist them clear,   
Mis-shape them whole, sail them across the small air   
Space of the closet. I shall find room enough here 

By excluding myself; by excluding myself, I'll grow.