 
"e to allor li prega Per quell' amor the i mena, e quei verranno."  INFERNO V
This also is a place that love is known in,   
This hollow land beneath a lifeless sea 
Opposite to the place that he was born in,   
How far it is impossible to say. 
         The brackish water as I crossed 
         A bridge was delicately creased 
And stained and stale, like love-disordered linen. 

Lovers here must meet on unsure ground   
Like strangers in a circumspect hotel   
Which, although luxurious and grand,   
Trembles beneath their feet like earth in hell. 
         Lifted on concentric gales 
         Scraps of paper, leaves and gulls   
Fluttered dismally aloft and groaned. 

Here darkness grows and light itself decays;   
Rain falls from time to time and night falls too   
Upon earth's civil centre that decoys   
The eternal with the promise that is now. 
         There were no corners, every street 
         Ran on infinite and straight, 
There is no gate, no warning and no keys. 

I hear a step approaching and refuse   
To look aside, a while your silhouette   
Persists, the fire illuminates your face   
From under as you light a cigarette; 
         All-knowing, arch-angelic eyes, 
         Human features cut in ice-- 
The spark you struck at once attained the fuse. 

I recognize the vanity and scorn, 
The fear, the greed, in short the mask of love,   
Familiar and disdainful, and I turn   
About. Like children sharing what they have 
         We learned in that experiment 
         What the spirit's weakness meant,   
The nature of the torment to be borne. 

What shall I give you? What will be your price?   
Your body's mine, the rich, fantastic horde   
Of your embracements--angels live on praise,   
Take it, it is all I can afford. 
         Outside a centrifugal wind 
         Sustained a freight of souls that whined   
And wept along the terrible canals. 

And when I close my eyes I see a ship   
At anchor in the water of a bay.   
I cling to that imaginary shape   
Capable of taking me away 
         To I do not know what ports. 
         Perhaps tomorrow it departs,   
Anonymous, invulnerable, free.