 
Glisten fretting the indigo of a plum, 
silvered chalk of moth-wing dust: 

the young man on the subway platform 
--twenty maybe--seems almost powdered, 

he is so dirty, the dust lighter 
than his skin, which is still, 

by a slight stretch of the imagination, 
lovely. Though it's odd to think 

of him that way, this shirtless kid 
in hugely oversized jeans that fall, 

when he stands, around his thighs, 
exposing his skinny ass. He yanks 

the waistband up, sits down again, 
and begins to writhe, palms roaming, 

uncontrollable, over his own face, 
his close-cropped hair and ears, 

down to his flanks, hands disappearing 
inside the big jeans, scratching 

and rubbing, until he collapses, exhausted, 
head hanging between his knees, 

and after a few seconds starts 
it all up again. Does he want 

to rub his own skin away? Then 
I understand: what's powdering his flesh is 

his flesh, the outest layer of himself 
rubbed to palest chalk. He repeats 

his stream of violent tableaux 
these might be positions of transport, 

of ecstasy, except he's miserable, I guess, 
and it's two in the afternoon, 96th and Broadway, 

and all of us waiting for the local 
watch, how can we help it? Crackhead, 

somebody says, but it's a whisper, a question, 
and nothing answers our troubled fascination: 

nothing to do but watch the pity and terror 
of these poses. The express comes and goes, 

and the brutal series grows more synaptic: 
these might be flashes of the pornographic, 

or classical attitudes, rough trade posing 
as a captive slave for Michelangelo. Our context's 

neither intimate nor academic, and nothing's 
supposed to be so real in the common nowhere 

of the on-the-way-to, while we wait 
for the 1 or the 9, strangers and witnesses 

pressed knee to hem, back to shoulder 
on the platforms and cars. This month, 

on the broad haunches of the buses, 
another sleek boy's posed in multiple shots, 

black underwear and lean belly laved by rivulets 
from a shower or stream. The photographees 

left him headless, his gestures multiplied 
on builders' makeshift walls, page after page 

of blank torsos already beginning to be inscribed: 
on a yard of silvery muscle six feet from Seventh Avenue 

someone's scrawled, in black marker: I am a sweet 
suck and fuck machine. Take me home. Big buses 

nose through the streets, one after the other, 
bearing the model of what we're supposed to want, 

and do, what we're meant to see and need 
but not, unless we have the money, touch. 

He doesn't have the money, my boy 
on the platform, and I wish .... What? 

I don't know. Just today, in traffic, 
one of those buses eased by my taxi window: 

a taut wet waist bound in black elastic, 
huge, luminous emulsion inches 

from my face. The endlessly reprinted boy 
--is he?--could almost be this man, 

whitened by his own degrading skin, 
dark stone wearing the dust of the quarry. 

He's rubbing himself to flour, he's giving 
his name back to airy nothing, I'm figuring him 

on the varnished bench. Moth, plum--hear 
how the imagery aestheticizes? He's nothing 

as fixed as marble, and he touches himself 
not for pleasure but because he can't stop. 

What unthinkable train is he waiting for? 
That boy on the billboard, the headless boy, 

could he stop touching himself? 
We're all on display in this town, 

sweet machines, powerless, consumed, 
just as he consumes himself 

with those relentless hands, 
scratching his barely hidden center, 

hanging his head between his knees, 
spent, before he jerks himself up 
and starts all over again.