 
O for that warning voice, which he who saw 
Th' Apocalypse heard cry in Heaven aloud, 
Then when the Dragon, put to second rout, 
Came furious down to be reveng'd on men, 
"Woe to the inhabitants on Earth!" that now, 
While time was, our first parents had been warn'd 
The coming of their secret foe, and scap'd, 
Haply so scap'd, his mortal snare! For now 
Satan, now first inflam'd with rage, came down, 
The tempter, ere th' accuser, of mankind, 
To wreak on innocent frail Man his loss 
Of that first battle and his flight to Hell; 
Yet not rejoicing in his speed, though bold 
Far off and fearless, nor with cause to boast, 
Begins his dire attempt; which, nigh the birth 
Now rolling, boils in his tumultuous breast, 
And like a devilish engine back recoils 
Upon himself. Horror and doubt distract 
His troubl'd thoughts and from the bottom stir 
The hell within him; for within him Hell 
He brings, and round about him, nor from Hell 
One step, no more than from himself, can fly 
By change of place. Now conscience wakes despair 
That slumber'd, wakes the bitter memory 
Of what he was, what is, and what must be 
Worse: of worse deeds worse sufferings must ensue! 
Sometimes towards Eden, which now in his view 
Lay pleasant, his griev'd look he fixes sad; 
Sometimes towards heaven and the full-blazing sun, 
Which now sat high in his meridian tower: 
Then, much revolving, thus in sighs began: 

"O thou that with surpassing glory crown'd 
Look'st from thy sole dominion like the God 
Of this new World--at whose sight all the stars 
Hide their diminish'd heads--to thee I call, 
But with no friendly voice, and add thy name, 
O Sun, to tell thee how I hate thy beams, 
That bring to my remembrance from what state 
I fell, how glorious once above thy sphere, 
Till pride and worse ambition threw me down, 
Warring in Heav'n against Heav'n's matchless King: 
Ah, wherefore? He deserv'd no such return 
From me, whom he created what I was 
In that bright eminence, and with his good 
Upbraided none; nor was his service hard. 
What could be less than to afford him praise, 
The easiest recompense, and pay him thanks, 
How due! Yet all his good prov'd ill in me, 
And wrought but malice; lifted up so high, 
I 'sdain'd subjection, and thought one step higher 
Would set me highest and in a moment quit 
The debt immense of endless gratitude, 
So burdensome, still paying, still to owe; 
Forgetful what from him I still receiv'd; 
And understood not that a grateful mind 
By owing owes not, but still pays, at once 
Indebted and discharg'd: what burden then? 
O had his powerful destiny ordain'd 
Me some inferior Angel, I had stood 
Then happy: no unbounded hope had rais'd 
Ambition. Yet why not? Some other Power 
As great might have aspir'd, and me, though mean, 
Drawn to his part; but other Powers as great 
Fell not, but stand unshak'n, from within 
Or from without to all temptations arm'd! 
Hadst thou the same free will and power to stand? 
Thou hadst. Whom hast thou then, or what, to accuse, 
But Heav'n's free love dealt equally to all? 
Be then his love accurs'd, since, love or hate, 
To me alike it deals eternal woe. 
Nay, curs'd be thou, since against his thy will 
Chose freely what it now so justly rues. 
Me miserable! which way shall I fly 
Infinite wrath and infinite despair? 
Which way I fly is Hell; myself am Hell; 
And, in the lowest deep, a lower deep 
Still threat'ning to devour me opens wide, 
To which the Hell I suffer seems a Heav'n. 
O then at last relent! is there no place 
Left for repentance, none for pardon left? 
None left but by submission; and that word 
Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame 
Among the Spirits beneath, whom I seduc'd 
With other promises and other vaunts 
Than to submit, boasting I could subdue 
Th' Omnipotent. Ay me! they little know 
How dearly I abide that boast so vain, 
Under what torments inwardly I groan; 
While they adore me on the throne of Hell, 
With diadem and sceptre high advanc'd, 
The lower still I fall, only supreme 
In misery: such joy ambition finds! 
But say I could repent, and could obtain, 
By act of grace, my former state: how soon 
Would highth recall high thoughts, how soon unsay 
What feign'd submission swore! Ease would recant 
Vows made in pain, as violent and void-- 
For never can true reconcilement grow 
Where wounds of deadly hate have pierc'd so deep-- 
Which would but lead me to a worse relapse 
And heavier fall: so should I purchase dear 
Short intermission bought with double smart. 
This knows my Punisher; therefore as far 
From granting he, as I from begging, peace. 
All hope excluded thus, behold, instead 
Of us, outcast, exil'd, his new delight, 
Mankind, created, and for him this World! 
So farewell Hope, and, with Hope, farewell Fear, 
Farewell Remorse! All good to me is lost: 
Evil, be thou my Good; by thee at least 
Divided empire with Heav'n's King I hold, 
By thee, and more than half perhaps will reign-- 
As Man ere long and this new World shall know." 

Thus while he spake, each passion dimm'd his face, 
Thrice chang'd with pale--ire, envy, and despair, 
Which marr'd his borrow'd visage and betray'd 
Him counterfeit, if any eye beheld; 
For heav'nly minds from such distempers foul 
Are ever clear. Whereof he soon aware 
Each perturbation smooth'd with outward calm, 
Artificer of fraud, and was the first 
That practis'd falsehood under saintly show, 
Deep malice to conceal, couch'd with revenge; 
Yet not enough had practis'd to deceive 
Uriel, once warn'd, whose eye pursu'd him down 
The way he went and on th' Assyrian mount 
Saw him disfigur'd, more than could befall 
Spirit of happy sort: his gestures fierce 
He mark'd and mad demeanour, then alone, 
As he suppos'd, all unobserv'd, unseen. 
So on he fares and to the border comes 
Of Eden, where delicious Paradise, 
Now nearer, crowns with her enclosure green, 
As with a rural mound, the champaign head 
Of a steep wilderness, whose hairy sides 
With thicket overgrown, grotesque and wild, 
Access denied; and overhead up-grew 
Insuperable highth of loftiest shade, 
Cedar, and pine, and fir, and branching palm, 
A sylvan scene and, as the ranks ascend 
Shade above shade, a woody theatre 
Of stateliest view. Yet higher than their tops 
The verdurous wall of Paradise up-sprung; 
Which to our general sire gave prospect large 
Into his nether empire neighbouring round. 
And higher than that wall a circling row 
Of goodliest trees, loaden with fairest fruit, 
Blossoms and fruits at once of golden hue, 
Appear'd, with gay enamell'd colours mix'd; 
On which the Sun more glad impress'd his beams 
Than in fair evening cloud, or humid bow, 
When God hath show'r'd the earth: so lovely seem'd 
That landskip. And of pure, now purer air 
Meets his approach, and to the heart inspires 
Vernal delight and joy, able to drive 
All sadness but despair. Now gentle gales, 
Fanning their odoriferous wings, dispense 
Native perfumes, and whisper whence they stole 
Those balmy spoils. As when to them who sail 
Beyond the Cape of Hope, and now are past 
Mozambic, off at sea north-east winds blow 
Sabean odours from the spicy shore 
Of Araby the Blest, with such delay 
Well pleas'd they slack their course, and many a league 
Cheer'd with the grateful smell old Ocean smiles: 
So entertain'd those odorous sweets the Fiend 
Who came their bane, though with them better pleas'd 
Than Asmodeus with the fishy fume 
That drove him, though enamour'd, from the spouse 
Of Tobit's son, and with a vengeance sent 
From Media post to Egypt, there fast bound. 

Now to th' ascent of that steep savage hill 
Satan had journeyed on, pensive and slow; 
But further way found none: so thick entwin'd, 
As one continu'd brake, the undergrowth 
Of shrubs and tangling bushes had perplex'd 
All path of man or beast that pass'd that way. 
One gate there only was, and that look'd east 
On th' other side; which when th' Arch-felon saw, 
Due entrance he disdain'd and, in contempt, 
At one slight bound high overleap'd all bound 
Of hill or highest wall, and sheer within 
Lights on his feet. As when a prowling wolf, 
Whom hunger drives to seek new haunt for prey, 
Watching where shepherds pen their flocks at eve 
In hurdl'd cotes amid the field secure, 
Leaps o'er the fence with ease into the fold; 
Or as a thief, bent to unhoard the cash 
Of some rich burgher, whose substantial doors, 
Cross-barr'd and bolted fast, fear no assault, 
In at the window climbs, or o'er the tiles: 
So clomb this first grand Thief into God's fold: 
So since into his Church lewd hirelings climb. 
Thence up he flew, and on the Tree of Life, 
The middle tree and highest there that grew, 
Sat like a cormorant; yet not true life 
Thereby regain'd, but sat devising death 
To them who liv'd; nor on the virtue thought 
Of that life-giving plant, but only us'd 
For prospect what, well us'd, had been the pledge 
Of immortality. So little knows 
Any but God alone to value right 
The good before him, but perverts best things 
To worst abuse, or to their meanest use. 
Beneath him, with new wonder, now he views, 
To all delight of human sense expos'd, 
In narrow room Nature's whole wealth; yea, more-- 
A Heaven on Earth; for blissful Paradise 
Of God the garden was, by him in the east 
Of Eden planted; Eden stretch'd her line 
From Auran eastward to the royal tow'rs 
Of great Seleucia, built by Grecian kings, 
Or where the sons of Eden long before 
Dwelt in Telassar: in this pleasant soil 
His far more pleasant garden God ordain'd. 
Out of the fertile ground he caus'd to grow 
All trees of noblest kind for sight, smell, taste; 
And all amid them stood the Tree of Life, 
High eminent, blooming ambrosial fruit 
Of vegetable gold; and, next to life, 
Our death, the Tree of Knowledge, grew fast by-- 
Knowledge of good, bought dear by knowing ill. 
Southward through Eden went a river large, 
Nor chang'd his course, but through the shaggy hill 
Pass'd underneath ingulf'd; for God had thrown 
That mountain, as his garden-mould, high rais'd 
Upon the rapid current, which through veins 
Of porous earth with kindly thirst up-drawn 
Rose a fresh fountain, and with many a rill 
Water'd the garden; thence united fell 
Down the steep glade and met the nether flood, 
Which from his darksome passage now appears, 
And now, divided into four main streams, 
Runs diverse, wand'ring many a famous realm 
And country, whereof here needs no account, 
But rather to tell how, if art could tell, 
How from that sapphire fount the crisped brooks, 
Rolling on orient pearl and sands of gold, 
With mazy error under pendent shades 
Ran nectar, visiting each plant, and fed 
Flow'rs worthy of Paradise, which not nice Art 
In beds and curious knots, but Nature boon 
Pour'd forth profuse on hill, and dale, and plain, 
Both where the morning sun first warmly smote 
The open field, and where the unpierc'd shade 
Imbrown'd the noontide bow'rs. Thus was this place, 
A happy rural seat of various view: 
Groves whose rich trees wept odorous gums and balm; 
Others whose fruit, burnish'd with golden rind, 
Hung amiable--Hesperian fables true, 
If true, here only--and of delicious taste. 
Betwixt them lawns, or level downs, and flocks 
Grazing the tender herb, were interpos'd, 
Or palmy hillock; or the flow'ry lap 
Of some irriguous valley spread her store, 
Flow'rs of all hue, and without thorn the rose; 
Another side, umbrageous grots and caves 
Of cool recess, o'er which the mantling vine 
Lays forth her purple grape and gently creeps 
Luxuriant. Meanwhile murmuring waters fall 
Down the slope hills, dispers'd, or in a lake, 
That to the fringed bank with myrtle crown'd 
Her crystal mirror holds, unite their streams. 
The birds their quire apply; airs, vernal airs, 
Breathing the smell of field and grove, attune 
The trembling leaves, while universal Pan, 
Knit with the Graces and the Hours in dance, 
Led on th' eternal Spring. Not that fair field 
Of Enna, where Proserpin gath'ring flow'rs, 
Herself a fairer flow'r, by gloomy Dis 
Was gather'd--which cost Ceres all that pain 
To seek her through the world; nor that sweet grove 
Of Daphne, by Orontes and th' inspir'd 
Castalian spring, might with this Paradise 
Of Eden strive; nor that Nyseian isle, 
Girt with the river Triton, where old Cham, 
Whom Gentiles Ammon call and Libyan Jove, 
Hid Amalthea and her florid son, 
Young Bacchus, from his stepdame Rhea's eye; 
Nor, where Abassin kings their issue guard, 
Mount Amara (though this by some suppos'd 
True Paradise) under the Ethiop line 
By Nilus' head, enclos'd with shining rock, 
A whole day's journey high, but wide remote 
From this Assyrian garden where the Fiend 
Saw undelighted all delight, all kind 
Of living creatures, new to sight and strange. 
Two of far nobler shape, erect and tall, 
God-like erect, with native honour clad 
In naked majesty, seem'd lords of all, 
And worthy seem'd; for in their looks divine 
The image of their glorious Maker shone, 
Truth, wisdom, sanctitude severe and pure-- 
Severe, but in true filial freedom plac'd, 
Whence true authority in men: though both 
Not equal, as their sex not equal seem'd; 
For contemplation he and valour form'd, 
For softness she and sweet attractive grace; 
He for God only, she for God in him. 
His fair, large front and eye sublime declar'd 
Absolute rule, and hyacinthine locks 
Round from his parted forelock manly hung 
Clust'ring, but not beneath his shoulders broad; 
She, as a veil down to the slender waist, 
Her unadorned golden tresses wore 
Dishevell'd, but in wanton ringlets wav'd 
As the vine curls her tendrils--which implied 
Subjection, but requir'd with gentle sway, 
And by her yielded, by him best receiv'd, 
Yielded with coy submission, modest pride, 
And sweet, reluctant, amorous delay. 
Nor those mysterious parts were then conceal'd: 
Then was not guilty shame. Dishonest Shame 
Of Nature's works, Honour dishonourable, 
Sin-bred, how have ye troubl'd all mankind 
With shows instead, mere shows of seeming pure, 
And banish'd from man's life his happiest life, 
Simplicity and spotless innocence! 
So pass'd they naked on, nor shunn'd the sight 
Of God or Angel; for they thought no ill. 
So hand in hand they pass'd, the loveliest pair 
That ever since in love's embraces met-- 
Adam the goodliest man of men since born 
His sons; the fairest of her daughters Eve. 
Under a tuft of shade that on a green 
Stood whispering soft, by a fresh fountain-side, 
They sat them down; and, after no more toil 
Of their sweet gard'ning labour than suffic'd 
To recommend cool Zephyr, and make ease 
More easy, wholesome thirst and appetite 
More grateful, to their supper-fruits they fell-- 
Nectarine fruits, which the compliant boughs 
Yielded them, sidelong as they sat recline 
On the soft downy bank damask'd with flow'rs. 
The savoury pulp they chew, and in the rind, 
Still as they thirsted, scoop the brimming stream; 
Nor gentle purpose, nor endearing smiles 
Wanted, nor youthful dalliance, as beseems 
Fair couple link'd in happy nuptial league, 
Alone as they. About them frisking play'd 
All beasts of th' earth, since wild, and of all chase 
In wood or wilderness, forest or den: 
Sporting the lion ramp'd, and in his paw 
Dandl'd the kid; bears, tigers, ounces, pards, 
Gamboll'd before them; th' unwieldy elephant, 
To make them mirth, us'd all his might, and wreath'd 
His lithe proboscis; close the serpent sly, 
Insinuating, wove with Gordian twine 
His braided train, and of his fatal guile 
Gave proof unheeded. Others on the grass 
Couch'd and, now fill'd with pasture, gazing sat, 
Or bedward ruminating; for the sun, 
Declin'd, was hasting now with prone career 
To th' Ocean Isles, and in th' ascending scale 
Of heav'n the stars that usher evening rose; 
When Satan, still in gaze as first he stood, 
Scarce thus at length fail'd speech recover'd sad: 

"O Hell! what do mine eyes with grief behold? 
Into our room of bliss thus high advanc'd 
Creatures of other mould--Earth-born perhaps, 
Not Spirits, yet to Heav'nly Spirits bright 
Little inferior--whom my thoughts pursue 
With wonder, and could love so lively shines 
In them divine resemblance, and such grace 
The hand that form'd them on their shape hath pour'd. 
Ah! gentle pair, ye little think how nigh 
Your change approaches, when all these delights 
Will vanish and deliver ye to woe-- 
More woe, the more your taste is now of joy: 
Happy, but for so happy ill secur'd 
Long to continue, and this high seat, your Heav'n, 
Ill-fenc'd for Heav'n to keep out such a foe 
As now is enter'd; yet no purpos'd foe 
To you, whom I could pity thus forlorn, 
Though I unpitied. League with you I seek, 
And mutual amity, so strait, so close, 
That I with you must dwell, or you with me, 
Henceforth. My dwelling, haply, may not please 
Like this fair Paradise your sense; yet such 
Accept your Maker's work; he gave it me, 
Which I as freely give. Hell shall unfold, 
To entertain you two, her widest gates, 
And send forth all her kings; there will be room, 
Not like these narrow limits, to receive 
Your numerous offspring; if no better place, 
Thank him who puts me, loath, to this revenge 
On you, who wrong me not, for him who wrong'd. 
And, should I at your harmless innocence 
Melt, as I do, yet public reason just-- 
Honour and empire with revenge enlarg'd 
By conquering this new world--compels me now 
To do what else, though damn'd, I should abhor." 

So spake the Fiend, and with necessity, 
The tyrant's plea, excus'd his devilish deeds. 
Then from his lofty stand on that high tree 
Down he alights among the sportful herd 
Of those four-footed kinds, himself now one, 
Now other, as their shape serv'd best his end, 
Nearer to view his prey, and, unespied, 
To mark what of their state he more might learn 
By word or action mark'd. About them round 
A lion now he stalks with fiery glare; 
Then as a tiger, who by chance hath spied 
In some purlieu two gentle fawns at play, 
Straight crouches close, then, rising, changes oft 
His couchant watch, as one who chose his ground, 
Whence rushing he might surest seize them both 
Gripp'd in each paw; when Adam, first of men, 
To first of women, Eve, thus moving speech, 
Turn'd him all ear to hear new utterance flow: 

"Sole partner and sole part of all these joys, 
Dearer thyself than all, needs must the Power 
That made us, and for us this ample world, 
Be infinitely good, and of his good 
As liberal and free as infinite; 
That rais'd us from the dust, and plac'd us here 
In all this happiness, who at his hand 
Have nothing merited, nor can perform 
Aught whereof he hath need; he who requires 
From us no other service than to keep 
This one, this easy charge: of all the trees 
In Paradise that bear delicious fruit 
So various, not to taste that only Tree 
Of Knowledge, planted by the Tree of Life: 
So near grows Death to Life, whate'er death is-- 
Some dreadful thing no doubt; for well thou know'st 
God hath pronounc'd it death to taste that Tree: 
The only sign of our obedience left 
Among so many signs of power and rule 
Conferr'd upon us, and dominion giv'n 
Over all other creatures that possess 
Earth, air, and sea. Then let us not think hard 
One easy prohibition, who enjoy 
Free leave so large to all things else, and choice 
Unlimited of manifold delights; 
But let us ever praise him and extol 
His bounty, following our delightful task, 
To prune these growing plants and tend these flowers; 
Which, were it toilsome, yet with thee were sweet." 

To whom thus Eve replied: "O thou for whom 
And from whom I was form'd flesh of thy flesh, 
And without whom am to no end, my guide 
And head! what thou hast said is just and right. 
For we to him, indeed, all praises owe, 
And daily thanks--I chiefly, who enjoy 
So far the happier lot, enjoying thee, 
Pre-eminent by so much odds, while thou 
Like consort to thyself canst nowhere find. 
That day I oft remember, when from sleep 
I first awak'd and found myself repos'd, 
Under a shade, on flow'rs, much wond'ring where 
And what I was, whence thither brought, and how. 
Not distant far from thence a murmuring sound 
Of waters issu'd from a cave, and spread 
Into a liquid plain, then stood unmov'd, 
Pure as th' expanse of heav'n. I thither went 
With unexperienc'd thought, and laid me down 
On the green bank, to look into the clear 
Smooth lake, that to me seem'd another sky. 
As I bent down to look, just opposite 
A shape within the wat'ry gleam appear'd, 
Bending to look on me. I started back, 
It started back; but pleas'd I soon return'd 
Pleas'd it return'd as soon with answering looks 
Of sympathy and love. There I had fix'd 
Mine eyes till now, and pin'd with vain desire, 
Had not a voice thus warn'd me: 'What thou seest 
What there thou seest, fair creature, is thyself: 
With thee it came and goes; but follow me, 
And I will bring thee where no shadow stays 
Thy coming and thy soft embraces--he 
Whose image thou art; him thou shalt enjoy 
Inseparably thine; to him shalt bear 
Multitudes like thyself, and thence be call'd 
Mother of human race.' What could I do 
But follow straight, invisibly thus led? 
Till I espied thee, fair indeed and tall, 
Under a platan; yet methought less fair, 
Less winning soft, less amiably mild, 
Than that smooth wat'ry image. Back I turn'd; 
Thou, following, cried'st aloud, 'Return, fair Eve; 
Whom fliest thou? Whom thou fliest, of him thou art, 
His flesh, his bone; to give thee being I lent 
Out of my side to thee, nearest my heart, 
Substantial life, to have thee by my side 
Henceforth an individual solace dear: 
Part of my soul I seek thee, and thee claim 
My other half.' With that thy gentle hand 
Seiz'd mine: I yielded, and from that time see 
How beauty is excell'd by manly grace 
And wisdom, which alone is truly fair." 

So spake our general mother, and, with eyes 
Of conjugal attraction unreprov'd, 
And meek surrender, half-embracing lean'd 
On our first father; half her swelling breast 
Naked met his, under the flowing gold 
Of her loose tresses hid. He, in delight 
Both of her beauty and submissive charms, 
Smil'd with superior love, as Jupiter 
On Juno smiles when he impregns the clouds 
That shed May flowers, and press'd her matron lip 
With kisses pure. Aside the Devil turn'd 
For envy; yet with jealous leer malign 
Ey'd them askance, and to himself thus plain'd: 

"Sight hateful, sight tormenting! Thus these two, 
Imparadis'd in one another's arms, 
The happier Eden, shall enjoy their fill 
Of bliss on bliss; while I to Hell am thrust, 
Where neither joy nor love, but fierce desire, 
Among our other torments not the least, 
Still unfulfill'd, with pain of longing pines! 
Yet let me not forget what I have gain'd 
From their own mouths. All is not theirs, it seems; 
One fatal tree there stands, of Knowledge call'd, 
Forbidden them to taste. Knowledge forbidd'n? 
Suspicious, reasonless! Why should their Lord 
Envy them that? Can it be sin to know? 
Can it be death? And do they only stand 
By ignorance? Is that their happy state, 
The proof of their obedience and their faith? 
O fair foundation laid whereon to build 
Their ruin! Hence I will excite their minds 
With more desire to know, and to reject 
Envious commands, invented with design 
To keep them low, whom knowledge might exalt 
Equal with Gods. Aspiring to be such, 
They taste and die: what likelier can ensue? 
But first with narrow search I must walk round 
This garden, and no corner leave unspied:-- 
A chance, but chance may lead where I may meet 
Some wand'ring Spirit of Heav'n, by fountain-side, 
Or in thick shade retir'd, from him to draw 
What further would be learn'd. Live while ye may, 
Yet happy pair; enjoy, till I return, 
Short pleasures; for long woes are to succeed!" 

So saying, his proud step he scornful turn'd, 
But with sly circumspection, and began 
Through wood, through waste, o'er hill, o'er dale, his roam. 
Meanwhile in utmost longitude, where heav'n 
With earth and ocean meets, the setting sun 
Slowly descended, and with right aspect 
Against the eastern gate of Paradise 
Levell'd his evening rays. It was a rock 
Of alabaster, pil'd up to the clouds, 
Conspicuous far, winding with one ascent 
Accessible from earth, one entrance high; 
The rest was craggy cliff, that overhung 
Still as it rose, impossible to dimb. 
Betwixt these rocky pillars Gabriel sat, 
Chief of th' angelic guards, awaiting night; 
About him exercis'd heroic games 
Th' unarmed youth of Heav'n; but nigh at hand 
Celestial armoury, shields, helms, and spears, 
Hung high, with diamond flaming and with gold. 
Thither came Uriel, gliding through the even 
On a sunbeam, swift as a shooting star 
In autumn thwarts the night, when vapours fir'd 
Impress the air, and shows the mariner 
From what point of his compass to beware 
Impetuous winds. He thus began in haste: 

"Gabriel, to thee thy course by lot hath giv'n 
Charge and strict watch that to this happy place 
No evil thing approach or enter in. 
This day at highth of noon came to my sphere 
A Spirit, zealous as he seem'd to know 
More of th' Almighty's works, and chiefly Man, 
God's latest image. I describ'd his way 
Bent all on speed, and mark'd his airy gait, 
But in the mount that lies from Eden north, 
Where he first lighted, soon discern'd his looks 
Alien from Heav'n, with passions foul obscur'd. 
Mine eye pursu'd him still, but under shade 
Lost sight of him. One of the banish'd crew, 
I fear, hath ventur'd from the Deep, to raise 
New troubles; him thy care must be to find." 

To whom the winged warrior thus return'd: 
"Uriel, no wonder if thy perfect sight, 
Amid the sun's bright circle where thou sitt'st, 
See far and wide. In at this gate none pass 
The vigilance here plac'd, but such as come 
Well known from Heav'n; and since meridian hour 
No creature thence. If Spirit of other sort, 
So minded, have o'erleap'd these earthy bounds 
On purpose, hard thou know'st it to exclude 
Spiritual substance with corporeal bar. 
But if within the circuit of these walks, 
In whatsoever shape, he lurk of whom 
Thou tell'st, by morrow dawning I shall know." 

So promis'd he; and Uriel to his charge 
Return'd on that bright beam, whose point now rais'd 
Bore him slope downward to the sun, now fall'n 
Beneath th' Azores; whether the prime orb, 
Incredible how swift, had thither roll'd 
Diurnal, or this less volubil earth, 
By shorter flight to th' east, had left him there 
Arraying with reflected purple and gold 
The clouds that on his western throne attend. 

Now came still Evening on, and Twilight gray 
Had in her sober livery all things clad; 
Silence accompanied; for beast and bird, 
They to their grassy couch, these to their nests, 
Were slunk, all but the wakeful nightingale; 
She all night long her amorous descant sung: 
Silence was pleas'd. Now glow'd the firmament 
With living sapphires; Hesperus, that led 
The starry host, rode brightest, till the Moon, 
Rising in clouded majesty, at length 
Apparent queen, unveil'd her peerless light 
And o'er the dark her silver mantle threw. 

When Adam thus to Eve: "Fair consort, th' hour 
Of night, and all things now retir'd to rest, 
Mind us of like repose, since God hath set 
Labour and rest, as day and night, to men 
Successive, and the timely dew of sleep 
Now falling with soft slumb'rous weight inclines 
Our eyelids. Other creatures all day long 
Rove idle, unemploy'd, and less need rest; 
Man hath his daily work of body or mind 
Appointed, which declares his dignity 
And the regard of Heav'n on all his ways; 
While other animals unactive range, 
And of their doings God takes no account. 
To-morrow, ere fresh morning streak the east 
With first approach of light, we must be ris'n 
And at our pleasant labour, to reform 
Yon flow'ry arbours, yonder alleys green, 
Our walks at noon, with branches overgrown, 
That mock our scant manuring, and require 
More hands than ours to lop their wanton growth. 
Those blossoms also, and those dropping gums, 
That lie bestrewn, unsightly and unsmooth, 
Ask riddance if we mean to tread with ease. 
Meanwhile, as Nature wills, Night bids us rest." 

To whom thus Eve, with perfect beauty adorned: 
"My author and disposer, what thou bidd'st 
Unargu'd I obey; so God ordains. 
God is thy law, thou mine: to know no more 
Is woman's happiest knowledge and her praise. 
With thee conversing I forget all time, 
All seasons and their change: all please alike. 
Sweet is the breath of morn, her rising sweet, 
With charm of earliest birds; pleasant the sun, 
When first on this delightful land he spreads 
His orient beams, on herb, tree, fruit, and flow'r, 
Glist'ring with dew; fragrant the fertile earth 
After soft showers; and sweet the coming-on 
Of grateful evening mild; then silent night, 
With this her solemn bird, and this her moon, 
And these the gems of heav'n, her starry train: 
But neither breath of morn when she ascends 
With charm of earliest birds, nor rising sun 
On this delightful land, nor herb, fruit, flower, 
Glist'ring with dew, nor fragrance after showers, 
Nor grateful evening mild, nor silent night, 
With this her solemn bird, nor walk by moon 
Or glittering starlight, without thee is sweet. 
But wherefore all night long shine these? for whom 
This glorious sight, when sleep hath shut all eyes?" 

To whom our general ancestor replied: 
"Daughter of God and Man, accomplish'd Eve, 
Those have their course to finish round the earth 
By morrow evening, and from land to land 
In order, though to nations yet unborn, 
Minist'ring light prepar'd, they set and rise; 
Lest total darkness should by night regain 
Her old possession, and extinguish life 
In nature and all things, which these soft fires 
Not only enlighten, but with kindly heat 
Of various influence foment and warm, 
Temper or nourish, or in part shed down 
Their stellar virtue on all kinds that grow 
On earth, made hereby apter to receive 
Perfection from the sun's more potent ray. 
These, then, though unbeheld in deep of night, 
Shine not in vain. Nor think, though men were none, 
That heav'n would want spectators, God want praise. 
Millions of spiritual creatures walk the earth 
Unseen, both when we wake and when we sleep: 
All these with ceaseless praise his works behold 
Both day and night. How often, from the steep 
Of echoing hill or thicket, have we heard 
Celestial voices to the midnight air, 
Sole or responsive each to other's note, 
Singing their great Creator! Oft in bands 
While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk, 
With heav'nly touch of instrumental sounds 
In full harmonic number join'd, their songs 
Divide the night and lift our thoughts to Heaven." 

Thus talking, hand in hand alone they pass'd 
On to their blissful bower. It was a place 
Chos'n by the sovran Planter, when he fram'd 
All things to Man's delightful use: the roof 
Of thickest covert was inwoven shade, 
Laurel and myrtle, and what higher grew 
Of firm and fragrant leaf; on either side 
Acanthus and each odorous bushy shrub 
Fenc'd up the verdant wall; each beauteous flower, 
Iris all hues, roses, and jessamine, 
Rear'd high their flourish'd heads between, and wrought 
Mosaic; under foot the violet, 
Crocus, and hyacinth, with rich inlay 
Broider'd the ground, more colour'd than with stone 
Of costliest emblem. Other creature here, 
Beast, bird, insect, or worm, durst enter none; 
Such was their awe of Man. In shadier bower 
More sacred and sequester'd, though but feign'd, 
Pan or Silvanus never slept, nor nymph 
Nor Faunus haunted. Here in close recess, 
With flowers, garlands, and sweet-smelling herbs, 
Espoused Eve deck'd first her nuptial bed, 
And heav'nly quires the hymenaean sung, 
What day the genial Angel to our sire 
Brought her, in naked beauty more adorn'd, 
More lovely, than Pandora, whom the Gods 
Endow'd with all their gifts; and O too like 
In sad event, when, to the unwiser son 
Of Japhet brought by Hermes, she ensnar'd 
Mankind with her fair looks, to be aveng'd 
On him who had stole Jove's authentic fire. 

Thus at their shady lodge arriv'd, both stood, 
Both turn'd, and under open sky ador'd 
The God that made both sky, air, earth, and Heav'n, 
Which they beheld, the moon's resplendent globe, 
And starry pole:--"Thou also mad'st the night, 
Maker Omnipotent, and thou the day, 
Which we, in our appointed work employ'd, 
Have finish'd, happy in our mutual help 
And mutual love, the crown of all our bliss 
Ordain'd by thee, and this delicious place, 
For us too large, where thy abundance wants 
Partakers, and uncropt falls to the ground. 
But thou hast promis'd from us two a race 
To fill the earth, who shall with us extol 
Thy goodness infinite, both when we wake 
And when we seek, as now, thy gift of sleep." 

This said unanimous, and other rites 
Observing none, but adoration pure 
Which God likes best, into their inmost bower 
Handed they went; and, eas'd the putting-off 
These troublesome disguises which we wear, 
Straight side by side were laid; nor turn'd, I ween, 
Adam from his fair spouse, nor Eve the rites 
Mysterious of connubial love refus'd-- 
Whatever hypocrites austerely talk 
Of purity, and place, and innocence, 
Deeming as impure what God declares 
Pure, and commands to some, leaves free to all. 
Our Maker bids increase; who bids abstain 
But our destroyer, foe to God and Man? 
Hail wedded Love, mysterious law, true source 
Of human offspring, sole propriety 
In Paradise of all things common else! 
By thee adulterous lust was driv'n from men 
Among the bestial herds to range; by thee, 
Founded in reason, loyal, just, and pure, 
Relations dear, and all the charities 
Of father, son, and brother, first were known. 
Far be it that I should write thee sin or blame, 
Or think thee unbefitting holiest place, 
Perpetual fountain of domestic sweets, 
Whose bed is undefil'd and chaste pronounc'd, 
Present or past, as saints and patriarchs us'd. 
Here Love his golden shafts employs, here lights 
His constant lamp and waves his purple wings, 
Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile 
Of harlots, loveless, joyless, unendear'd, 
Casual fruition, nor in court amours, 
Mix'd dance, or wanton mask, or midnight ball, 
Or serenate, which the starv'd lover sings 
To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain. 
These, lull'd by nightingales, embracing slept, 
And on their naked limbs the flow'ry roof 
Show'r'd roses, which the morn repair'd. Sleep on, 
Blest pair! and O yet happiest, if ye seek 
No happier state, and know to know no more! 

Now had Night measur'd with her shadowy cone 
Half-way uphill this vast sublunar vault, 
And from their ivory port the Cherubim, 
Forth issuing at th' accustom'd hour, stood arm'd 
To their night-watches in warlike parade; 
When Gabriel to his next in power thus spake: 
"Uzziel, half these draw off, and coast the south 
With strictest watch; these other wheel the north: 
Our circuit meets full west." As flame they part, 
Half wheeling to the shield, half to the spear. 
From these, two strong and subtle Spirits he call'd 
That near him stood, and gave them thus in charge: 
"Ithuriel and Zephon, with wing'd speed 
Search through this garden; leave unsearch'd no nook; 
But chiefly where those two fair creatures lodge, 
Now laid perhaps asleep, secure of harm. 
This evening from the sun's decline arriv'd 
Who tells of some infernal Spirit seen 
Hitherward bent (who could have thought?), escap'd 
The bars of Hell, on errand bad, no doubt: 
Such, where ye find, seize fasst and hither bring." 

So saying, on he led his radiant files, 
Dazzling the moon; these to the bower direct 
In search of whom they sought. Him there they found 
Squat like a toad, close at the ear of Eve, 
Assaying by his devilish art to reach 
The organs of her fancy and with them forge 
Illusions as he list, phantasms and dreams; 
Or if, inspiring venom, he might taint 
Th' animal spirits that from pure blood arise 
Like gentle breaths from rivers pure, thence raise 
At least distemper'd, discontented thoughts, 
Vain hopes, vain aims, inordinate desires, 
Blown up with high conceits engend'ring pride. 
Him thus intent Ithuriel with his spear 
Touch'd lightly; for no falsehood can endure 
Touch of celestial temper, but returns 
Of force to its own likeness. Up he starts, 
Discover'd and surpris'd. As when a spark 
Lights on a heap of nitrous powder, laid 
Fit for the tun, some magazine to store 
Against a rumour'd war, the smutty grain, 
With sudden blaze diffus'd, inflames the air: 
So started up in his own shape the Fiend. 
Back stept those two fair Angels, half amaz'd 
So sudden to behold the grisly king; 
Yet thus, unmov'd with fear, accost him soon: 

"Which of those rebel Spirits adjudg'd to Hell 
Com'st thou, escap'd thy prison? and, transform'd, 
Why satt'st thou like an enemy in wait, 
Here watching at the head of these that sleep?" 

"Know ye not, then," said Satan, fill'd with scorn, 
"Know ye not me? Ye knew me once no mate 
For you, there sitting where ye durst not soar! 
Not to know me argues yourselves unknown, 
The lowest of your throng; or, if ye know, 
Why ask ye, and superfluous begin 
Your message, like to end as much in vain?" 
To whom thus Zephon, answering scorn with scorn: 
"Think not, revolted Spirit, thy shape the same, 
Or undiminish'd brightness, to be known 
As when thou stood'st in Heav'n upright and pure. 
That glory then, when thou no more wast good, 
Departed from thee, and thou resembl'st now 
Thy sin and place of doom obscure and foul. 
But come; for thou, be sure, shalt give account 
To him who sent us whose charge is to keep 
This place inviolable and these from harm." 

So spake the Cherub; and his grave rebuke, 
Severe in youthful beauty, added grace 
Invincible. Abash'd the Devil stood, 
And felt how awful goodness is, and saw 
Virtue in her shape how lovely--saw and pin'd 
His loss, but chiefly to find here observ'd 
His lustre visibly impair'd; yet seem'd 
Undaunted. "If I must contend," said he, 
"Best with the best--the sender, not the sent, 
Or all at once: more glory will be won, 
Or less be lost." "Thy fear," said Zephon bold, 
"Will save us trial what the least can do 
Single against thee, wicked and thence weak." 

The Fiend replied not, overcome with rage; 
But, like a proud steed rein'd, went haughty on, 
Champing his iron curb. To strive or fly 
He held it vain; awe from above had quell'd 
His heart, not else dismay'd. Now drew they nigh 
The western point, where those half-rounding guards 
Just met and, closing, stood in squadron join'd, 
Awaiting next command. To whom their chief, 
Gabriel, from the front thus call'd aloud: 

''O friends, I hear the tread of nimble feet 
Hasting this way, and now by glimpse discern 
Ithuriel and Zephon through the shade; 
And with them comes a third, of regal port, 
But faded splendour wan, who by his gait 
And fierce demeanour seems the Prince of Hell-- 
Not likely to part hence without contest. 
Stand firm, for in his look defiance lours." 

He scarce had ended, when those two approach'd, 
And brief related whom they brought, where found, 
How busied, in what form and posture couch'd. 
To whom, with stern regard, thus Gabriel spake: 
"Why hast thou, Satan, broke the bounds prescrib'd 
To thy transgressions, and disturb'd the charge 
Of others who approve not to transgress 
By thy example, but have power and right 
To question thy bold entrance on this place, 
Employ'd, it seems, to violate sleep and those 
Whose dwelling God hath planted here in bliss?" 

To whom thus Satan, with contemptuous brow: 
"Gabriel, thou hadst in Heav'n th' esteem of wise, 
And such I held thee; but this question ask'd 
Puts me in doubt. Lives there who loves his pain? 
Who would not, finding way, break loose from Hell, 
Though thither doom'd? Thou wouldst thyself, no doubt, 
And boldly venture to whatever place 
Farthest from pain, where thou mightst hope to change 
Torment with ease, and soonest recompense 
Dole with delight, which in this place I sought: 
To thee no reason, who know'st only good, 
But evil hast not tried. And wilt object 
His will who bound us? Let him surer bar 
His iron gates if he intends our stay 
In that dark durance. Thus much what was ask'd; 
The rest is true: they found me where they say; 
But that implies not violence or harm." 

Thus he in scorn. The warlike Angel mov'd, 
Disdainfully half smiling, thus replied: 
"O loss of one in Heav'n to judge of wise 
Since Satan fell, whom folly overthrew, 
And now returns him from his prison scap'd, 
Gravely in doubt whether to hold them wise 
Or not who ask what boldness brought him hither 
Unlicens'd from his bounds in Hell prescrib'd! 
So wise he judges it to fly from pain, 
However, and to scape his punishment! 
So judge thou still, presumptuous, till the wrath 
Which thou incurr'st by flying meet thy flight 
Sevenfold and scourge that wisdom back to Hell, 
Which taught thee yet no better that no pain 
Can equal anger infinite provok'd. 
But wherefore thou alone? Wherefore with thee 
Came not all Hell broke loose? Is pain to them 
Less pain, less to be fled? or thou than they 
Less hardy to endure? Courageous chief, 
The first in flight from pain, hadst thou alleg'd 
To thy deserted host this cause of flight, 
Thou surely hadst not come sole fugitive." 

To which the Fiend thus answer'd, frowning stern: 
"Not that I less endure, or shrink from pain, 
Insulting Angel! well thou know'st I stood 
Thy fiercest, when in battle to thy aid 
The blasting volley'd thunder made all speed 
And seconded thy else not dreaded spear. 
But still thy words at random, as before, 
Argue thy inexperience what behoves, 
From hard assays and ill successes past, 
A faithful leader--not to hazard all 
Through ways of danger by himself untried. 
I, therefore, I alone, first undertook 
To wing the desolate Abyss and spy 
This new-created World, whereof in Hell 
Fame is not silent, here in hope to find 
Better abode, and my afflicted powers 
To settle here on earth, or in mid-air; 
Though for possession put to try once more 
What thou and thy gay legions dare against, 
Whose easier business were to serve their Lord 
High up in Heav'n, with songs to hymn his throne, 
And practis'd distances to cringe, not fight." 

To whom the warrior Angel soon replied: 
"To say and straight unsay, pretending first 
Wise to fly pain, professing next the spy, 
Argues no leader, but a liar trac'd, 
Satan; and couldst thou 'faithful' add? O name, 
O sacred name of faithfulness profan'd! 
Faithful to whom? to thy rebellious crew? 
Army of fiends, fit body to fit head! 
Was this your discipline and faith engag'd, 
Your military obedience, to dissolve 
Allegiance to th' acknowledg'd Power Supreme? 
And thou, sly hypocrite, who now wouldst seem 
Patron of liberty, who more than thou 
Once fawn'd, and cring'd, and servilely ador'd 
Heav'n's awful Monarch? wherefore, but in hope 
To dispossess him, and thyself to reign? 
But mark what I aread thee now: Avaunt! 
Fly thither whence thou fledd'st. If from this hour 
Within these hallow'd limits thou appear, 
Back to th' infernal Pit I drag thee chain'd, 
And seal thee so as henceforth not to scorn 
The facile gates of Hell too slightly barr'd." 

So threat'n'd he; but Satan to no threats 
Gave heed, but waxing more in rage, replied: 
"Then, when I am thy captive, talk of chains, 
Proud limitary Cherub! but ere then 
Far heavier load thyself expect to feel 
From my prevailing arm, though Heaven's King 
Ride on thy wings and thou with thy compeers, 
Us'd to the yoke, draw'st his triumphant wheels 
In progress through the road of Heav'n star-pav'd." 

While thus he spake, th' angelic squadron bright 
Turn'd fiery red, sharp'ning in mooned horns 
Their phalanx, and began to hem him round 
With ported spears, as thick as when a field 
Of Ceres, ripe for harvest, waving bends 
Her bearded grove of ears which way the wind 
Sways them, the careful ploughman doubting stands, 
Lest on the thrashing-floor his hopeful sheaves 
Prove chaff. On th' other side, Satan, alarm'd, 
Collecting all his might, dilated stood, 
Like Teneriff or Atlas, unremov'd: 
His stature reach'd the sky, and on his crest 
Sat Horror plum'd; nor wanted in his grasp 
What seem'd both spear and shield. Now dreadful deeds 
Might have ensu'd; nor only Paradise, 
In this commotion, but the starry cope 
Of heav'n perhaps, or all the elements 
At least, had gone to wrack, disturb'd and torn 
With violence of this conflict, had not soon 
Th' Eternal, to prevent such horrid fray, 
Hung forth in heav'n his golden scales, yet seen 
Betwixt Astraea and the Scorpion sign, 
Wherein all things created first he weigh'd-- 
The pendulous round Earth with balanc'd Air 
In counterpoise--now ponders all events, 
Battles and realms. In these he put two weights, 
The sequel each of parting and of fight: 
The latter quick up flew and kick'd the beam; 
Which Gabriel spying thus bespake the Fiend: 

"Satan, I know thy strength, and thou know'st mine, 
Neither our own, but giv'n; what folly then 
To boast what arms can do! since thine no more 
Than Heav'n permits, nor mine, though doubl'd now 
To trample thee as mire. For proof look up, 
And read thy lot in yon celestial sign, 
Where thou art weigh'd, and shown how light, how weak 
If thou resist." The Fiend look'd up and knew 
His mounted scale aloft: nor more, but fled 
Murmuring; and with him fled the shades of night.